Industry breathes life into quake-hit 
Bhuj, Feb. 19 (Reuters): A security guard in a bright blue uniform frisks Baburam Humble at the iron gate before he is let into the newly-built factory office where he works.																								Humble then punches in to begin a long day of taking orders from superiors and attending to the factorys steady stream of visitors. But he is not complaining.																								I was completely at a loss after the earthquake, not knowing how to face the tragedy, the 29-year-old said.																								This new factory has given me not only a livelihood, but also the strength to forget what happened in 2001.																								Measuring 6.7 on the Richter scale, the earthquake had killed nearly 20,000 people and flattened residential complexes and businesses across large parts here.																								Humble, who lost all his savings after the concrete-roofed house he shared with his four brothers collapsed in the quake, has begun a new chapter in his life with Rs 2,500 a month he earns from the detergent and chemical factory.																								Three years on, 150 industrial units are already functional or under construction in the Kutch region, and the development is transforming the region into a major industrial hub.																								Like Humble, thousands of Kutchis from this arid region on the Pakistan border are now rebuilding their lives with help from the industrial community, which, in turn, gets tax breaks for setting up there.																								The huge piles of debris and mangled metal from the flattened buildings in Bhuj, Anjar and Bachhau, three major towns destroyed by the quake, are giving way to multi-storied buildings and factories protected by iron gates and barbed wire fences.																								The tax breaks are helping Kutch gain an altogether new look, said F.S. Negi, general manager at PSL Holdings Ltd, which makes 60,000 tonnes of steel pipes per year. It is also helping quake survivors find much-needed livelihoods.																								In an attempt to spur investment and generate employment for those hit hardest by the quake, the central and state governments offer a maximum 24 per cent tax rebate for up to 10 years for industrial units set up between July 31, 2001, and July 31, 2004.																								While 81 small and medium-sized projects with an estimated investment of Rs 5 billion are already working, 58 projects worth a total investment of Rs 25 billion are at various stages of implementation.																								And a total of nearly Rs 31 billion has been pledged for fresh investments in sectors as diverse as edible oil refining, detergent and soap manufacturing, metal pipes and ceramic tiles.																								Officials of Gujarat Industrial Extension Bureau, which is leading the initiative to attract investors, say the new units will directly generate at least 80,000 jobs as well as several hundred thousands indirect jobs.																								These new investments are not only generating employment, it has added to the confidence of the local masses, H.C. Desai, the bureaus chief general manager, said.																								Derawar Singh, an 18-year-old migrant from neighbouring Rajasthan, is one beneficiary of Kutchs new industrial activity.																								I earn enough to run my family of five back home because of this new factory. Maybe I can earn more with units coming up, said Singh, who runs a restaurant in an industrial area near Anjar.																								The presence of two major ports on the west coast, the state-run Kandla and privately operated Mundra, and better road and rail networks are also helping Kutchs mushrooming industry.																								The ports are a major attraction. Kutch also has a locational advantage as it can cater to the vast north and western hinterland of India, said Negi.																								Officials say Kutchs new-found status as an investment magnet has sharply pushed up land prices.



WHEN NATURAL CALAMITY STRIKES Shobita Punja																					January 26, 2001 at 8.46 am, when the nation was preparing to celebrate our 52nd Republic Day, an earthquake struck the state of Gujarat. It was of enormous magnitude, between 7-8 points on the Richter scale with its epicentre just 20 kilometres northeast of Bhuj. The death and destruction that followed the earthquake spread over 15,000 kilometres with the loss of life estimated at 20,000, apart from loss of livestock and crores worth of property.																					The earthquake took everyone by surprise, but that is the character of natural calamities. No one was prepared for this scale of devastation and the lack of facilities was evident on many fronts  most important was the instant distribution of medical care on a large scale.																					In terms of the irreplaceable loss of national, cultural and historic assets of Gujarat, the earthquake exposed another aspect of our lack of preparedness and concern. The Archaeological Survey of India and the state department of archaeology in subsequent weeks estimated that over 900 protected monuments had been affected by the earthquake and needed urgent attention. The region of Kutch, known to be in the seismic zone with a record of tremors every 30-50 years, has one of Indias most beautiful traditions of vernacular building and extraordinary crafts traditions of communities who have adapted to the harsh near-desert environment over centuries.																					The 100-year-old Kutch Museum had caved in and buried rare antiques and art treasures in the rubble. The Aaina Mahal, palace of the rulers of Bhuj, that had partially been converted into a museum, lay in ruins, shrouding its precious objects in dust.																					Leveller																					The earthquake, like all natural phenomena, made no distinction between caste or religion or class and colour and devastated the Jubilee Hospital, the Fateh Mohammeds tomb, the Kalyaneshwar Temple, the Jail and the Alfred School in Bhuj.																					The beautiful Chattris outside Bhuj, erected to commemorate the royal family, was a favourite set for Bollywood films such as Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam. The majestic Chattris have now been reduced to rubble and ruins.																					The Rajkot area lost Jain and Hindu temples, dargahs and mosques of the medieval period. Even in Ahmedabad the quake damaged Gandhis historic meeting place, the Hriday Kunj, where he had sat spinning his charka in the Sabarmati Ashram.																					The clock tower at the Ranjit Vilas palace in Wankaner was seriously damaged and the clock had stopped at 8.46 am.																					May Republic Day each year be a reminder for all of us that we are not prepared. Each one of us must ask should an earthquake, flood, natural disaster happen unexpectedly today somewhere in India  do we have a task force to bring aid immediately to the injured and the dying, food and shelter for the homeless and helpless?																					Always on alert																					We need to have a well-formulated and rehearsed strategy for the protection and conservation of homes and private property. The Archaeological Survey of India and the state department of archaeology should have a manual for the protection of historic and cultural property during natural calamities. These departments must train their staff on how to respond efficiently and effectively during times of disaster.																					A photographic record and listing of historic and culturally important buildings of each city of India should be undertaken now. We need adequate documentation ready to help us repair and restore these buildings of historic value to their former glory.																					For people who have been traumatized, the psychological effect of restoring landmarks of a city, is immediately reassuring. When they see familiar landmarks again, when temples and mosques are back in use, the old post office and schools are working again  healing begins. When the majestic clock tower is chiming again telling us to get on with life once more, it should also remind us that anything can happen anytime  be prepared.




The Prime Minister today promised Narendra Modi that he would forward his request for a tax holiday for Kutch to finance minister Jaswant Singh.																								Atal Bihari Vajpayee made this promise while dedicating the multi-speciality GK General Hospital, reconstructed from the Prime Ministers Relief Fund, to the people of Kutch.																								The Gujarat chief minister, known for fiery speeches and abrasive behaviour, broke down while recalling the January 26, 2001, earthquake that devastated Kutch and also affected the rest of the state.																								I salute the zeal of (the) Kutchhi people, Modi said in a choked voice.																								The chief minister went on to recall the help he had received from the Prime Minister in tackling the disaster. He said Gujarat had recovered from the earthquake in less than three years. Japan, Mexico and Turkey have taken longer to rebuild after suffering earthquakes in recent years, Modi added.																								But this was possible with the cooperation and supervision of the Prime Minister, he said, describing Vajpayee as a father figure who had taught him how to walk.																								Vajpayee recalled the heart-rending scenes he witnessed at GK Hospital that collapsed during the quake, killing 182 people. He described the reconstruction as victory of life over death and said he saw tremendous scope for the hospital to expand.																								Dedicating the 300-bed hospital to the nation, the Prime Minister promised to open a medical college in Bhuj. 																								He offered central assistance for a corpus for this state-of-the-art hospital, which is to be run with the help of public sector units.																								Vajpayee said the hospital could become a major centre for medicare and medical tourism. A nursing college has already started, he said, adding that there should now be a medical college in Bhuj.																								On the demand for a tax holiday, he said: I will work as your postman to convey your demand to the finance minister.																								The Prime Minister said Gujarat had done well in medicare but should strive to improve the human development index as it still lags behind in literacy and health care.																								GK Hospital has been rebuilt with earthquake-resistant technology developed on the New Zealand model of base-isolation technology that can withstand quakes as high as 8 on the Richter scale. The technology uses lead-rubber bearings to isolate and protect structures during earthquakes.																								Earlier, Modi announced that Gujarat would soon have a world-class seismic institute. 																								He revealed that Vajpayee was so concerned about post-quake relief that he had appointed an officer to look after rehabilitation and monitored the progress.





Few disasters in living memory have achieved in scale of intensity and spread the devastation in seven countries caused by the rubbing of the Indian Ocean and Eurasian tectonic plates off the Sumatran coast. The earthquake was the biggest in 40 years, but it was the violently disturbed sea that burst onto the coasts ringing the Bay of Bengal to destroy and kill. The tsunami travelled miles to cause deaths in as far away as Kenya and Somalia. It was a tragic evocation of the earthquake in Iran on December 26 last year, but it was not completely unexpected. A team of seismologists led by two scientists of the Madras University?s applied geology department had predicted the date, time and place of the quake correctly, but had given a more optimistic prediction about its intensity. There is obviously a tragic disjunction between scientific findings and practical policies of defence and protection, which only national governments can implement. It seems even sadder that a proposal to put in place tsunami warning systems or tide gauges in countries around the Indian Ocean had been ignored since tsunamis were not common in the region.

 The destruction caused by the immense forces that moved earth and sea could not have been completely avoided. Yet something could have been saved, certainly numberless lives. In India, which is knowledgeable about many kinds of natural disasters but totally unacquainted with tsunami, the coastal toll has been terrible. What was remarkable was the fearlessness of the local people in immediate rescue operations, while the response from the government was prompt and coordinated. But this is the beginning of a long and painful story. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands have taken a hideous battering, while very little information can be got from some islands in the Maldives, a favourite tourist destination. In India, Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka and the Maldives, it is not merely the toll in lives, livelihoods, and property that will have to be counted, but the damage to infrastructure, the threat to health and, especially in the regions most dependent on tourism, the damage to the economy.

 Natural disasters are peculiar levellers. The 26 years of fierce insurgency in Aceh in Sumatra had made it difficult of access when it took the first brunt of the quake. Now the government and aid agencies are struggling to reach it, while loosened land mines planted in Sri Lanka by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam have increased accidents. Will there be less hostility while all sides count their dead? The only thing that human beings can do is use all the scientific and technical expertise at their command as defence against irresistible natural forces that take no account of hostile times and festive times, of the very young and the very old, of the poor fisherman and of the rich tourist.
 
 
 
 
 

