Hospital balm on AIDS alarm

 OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT

 A spurt in the number of HIV/AIDS cases detected in a city centre has coincided with the call for a hospital dedicated to address the disease.

 At the School of Tropical Medicine, the nodal centre for HIV/AIDS treatment in the state, 608 patients out of over 1,000 have tested positive for the virus in the past eight months.

 The city on Friday was also told that it would get its first hospital dedicated to treatment of the disease. This was announced by the Calcutta diocese of the Church of North India (CNI).

 More than five million people are suffering from this disease in India. We are concerned because it is spreading very rapidly, said P.S.P. Raju, bishop of the Calcutta diocese, following an AIDS sensitisation programme in CNI schools.

 One possibility is that the hospital begins on an existing but revamped premises in the Maniktala area.

 If that plan works out, the AIDS hospital should be up and running by January 2005, CNI sources said on Friday. But the possibility of a new hospital premises at some other location has not be ruled out, either.

 A series of awareness programmes, to involve students, teachers and principals of CNI schools, including La Martiniere, St James and Pratt Memorial, will also start shortly.

 The need for intervention in the city has never been greater. Of the new cases detected at the School of Tropical Medicine, 578 patents were from the city, a figure which, experts believe, is likely to go up in the next four months, taking this years tally far beyond that of last year.

 In 2003, over 1,200 tested positive at the School of Tropical Medicine, but the number from the city was smaller.

 The vulnerable age-group is the 20-35 years bracket and, while most infections are because of unprotected sex, some were also due to contaminated blood transfusions, said Bhibuti Saha, head of the department, tropical medicine.

 The School of Tropical Medicine disclosure comes close on the heels of a survey conducted by the National AIDS Control Organisation that monitors HIV infection nationally. It concluded that besides Delhi, Bengal is a cause of concern in terms of new infections.

 The number of mother-to-child infections has also shot up. The survey said there has been a 250 per cent increase in the number of HIV infections from unprotected sex and another 50 per cent in the number of mother-to-child infections.

 State government officials have agreed to extend support to the CNI hospital project. A team from social welfare organisations under the CNI, Delhi, were in the city this week to visit slums.

 We were surprised to find that many women have heard about AIDS but they do not know how fatal the disease is. We need to provide people with the necessary information, explained Karuna Roy, a Delhi-based HIV/AIDS counsellor.
 
 
 
 
 
Chandrababu Naidu wanted to make Andhra Pradesh a role model in development.

 But within months of his exit as chief minister, a recently released survey indicates that the state is going the South Africa way ? with a big jump in its number of HIV positive people.

 An annual survey conducted by the Andhra Pradesh AIDS Control Society ? each state AIDS Control Society puts out a similar surveillance report on HIV incidence ? has found that the number of HIV positive people in the state has shot up by 21 per cent over the last year.

 Andhra now has 4.8 lakh HIV positive people and ranks second only to Maharashtra in HIV incidence, at 13 per cent of the national average.

 The startling numbers have Dr K. Damayanti, project director of the state AIDS Control Society, saying: ?AP (Andhra Pradesh) is today what South Africa was a decade ago in HIV positive (incidence).?

 The society has recorded a sale of 65 million condoms over the last year. But, as the reports says: ?The number is not enough and touched hardly 30 per cent of the AIDS prospective population (people who are HIV positive and might contract AIDS).?

 The report says HIV incidence is highest in Guntur (3.75 per cent) and Prakasham (3 per cent) districts, both of which have a large floating population. Kadapa, Nellore, Karimnagar and West Godavari districts rank next, with 2 per cent incidence.

 Tirupati is the town with the highest HIV rate in the state ? 39 per cent ? attributable to its huge floating population. Hyderabad ranks next with 36 per cent, followed by Visakhapatanam (29 per cent), Vijayawada (28 per cent) and Rajahmundry (24 per cent).

 The AIDS society report says condom sale has increased by 32 per cent over the last year, but the high rate of HIV incidence indicates there could be a lack of awareness about its proper use. ?Nearly 65 million rubbers are sold during last year. But the incidence (of HIV positive people) has also shot up by 21 per cent over the last year,? Dr Damayanti says.

 She says HIV prevalence among pregnant women is a comparatively low 2.3 per cent in Guntur, Prakasham, Kadapa, Nellore, Karimnagar and West Godavari districts. ?But it has downsized to 1.25 per cent in other districts thanks to propaganda and awareness campaigns,? the project director says.
 
 
 
 
Disposable syringe on phase-out path 

 BAPPA MAJUMDAR

 Disposable syringes are on their way out from government hospitals in the city. 

 Safer auto-disabled (AD) syringes will take their place.

 Unlike disposable or glass syringes, the AD variety can never be reused as it punctures automatically the moment the injection is pushed into the human body.

 Worried over the rising cases of HIV infection and the possibilities of hepatitis B or C outbreak, thanks to unsafe injection practices, the government has placed an order for 2.5 lakh AD syringes with a Delhi-based firm, at an estimated cost of Rs 8 lakh.

 ?Unsafe injections can cost lives. So, we have decided to introduce the latest technology to minimise the chances of infection,? director of medical education C.R. Maiti explained to Metro on Friday. 

 Of late, the West Bengal Aids Control Society has been using AD syringes on an experimental basis. The government?s decision is based on a ?favourable? report submitted by the Society.

 ?Since the cost difference between a disposable and an AD syringe is not much ? Rs 3 to be precise ? we have decided to use the new ones more often. But phasing out the existing syringes will take some time,? Maiti added.

 According to the latest findings of the World Health Organisation (WHO), of an estimated 16 billion injections administered worldwide, millions are unsafe, causing deadly infections such as AIDS and hepatitis B and C. 

 In India, 65 per cent of the injections are considered unsafe. Around two million new hepatitis B cases, 400,000 new hepatitis C cases and 30,000 new HIV/AIDS cases are reported from all the states, including Bengal. 

 The figures emerged from a joint study by the Union health ministry, the clinical epidemiology unit of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and the World Bank.

 In Bengal, of the HIV cases reported over the past few years, several could have been caused by unsafe syringes. ?There is no way of finding out how the infections are spreading, but we cannot take chances. Hence, the decision to use AD syringes,? said a senior state health intelligence official.

 Following raids on and the busting of several rackets, the police have come to know that certain organised groups have been recycling disposable syringes and sending them back to the market.

 The Indian Medical Association (IMA), too, has taken a big step towards popularising the use of AD syringes in its recent ?Policy on Safe Injections?. 

 ?We are emphasising the importance of safe injections among our members. Hopefully, things will get better,? said R.D. Dubey, IMA joint secretary (headquarters).
 
 
 
 
 
 
Epidemic alert rings loud

 - Heat 

 on g8 to tackle ?worst cataclysm of modern era? 

 A damaged McDonald?s mannequin inside a destroyed restaurant in Phuket, Thailand. (AFP)

 Banda Aceh (Indonesia), Dec. 30 (Reuters): The death toll in the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster soared above 125,000 today as millions scrambled for food and fresh water.

 Aid agencies warned many more, from Indonesia to Sri Lanka, could die in epidemics if shattered communications and transport hampered what may prove history?s biggest relief operation. 

 Rescue workers pressed on into isolated villages shattered by a disaster that could yet eclipse a cyclone that struck Bangladesh in 1991, killing 138,000 people.

 Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi called for an emergency meeting of the Group of Eight so that the rich nations club could discuss aid and possible debt reduction following ?the worst cataclysm of the modern era?.

 The total toll had shot up more than 50 per cent in a day with still no clear picture of conditions in some isolated islands and villages around India and Indonesia. While villagers and fishermen suffered devastation, losses among foreign tourists, essential to local economies, mounted.

 Prime Minister Goran Persson said more than 1,000 Swedes may have been killed in the disaster. Indonesian health ministry sources said just under 80,000 had died in the northern Aceh province that was close to the undersea quake, some 28,000 more than previously announced. Two sources said the toll would be officially announced soon.

 The airport of the main city, Banda Aceh, was busy with aid flights, but residents said little was getting through to them. Hungry crowds jostling for aid biscuits besieged people delivering them in the town. Some drivers dared not stop.

 ?Some cars come by and throw food like that. The fastest get the food, the strong one wins. The elderly and the injured don?t get anything. We feel like dogs,? said Usman, 43.

 Residents of the city fled their homes when two aftershocks revived fresh memories of the worst earthquake in 40 years. ?I was sleeping, but fled outside in panic. If I am going to die, I will die here. Just let it be,? said Kaspian, 26.

 ?This isn?t just a situation of giving out food and water. Entire towns and villages need to be rebuilt from the ground up,? said Rod Volway of CARE Canada, whose emergency team was one of the first into Aceh. 

 ?As many as 5 million people are not able to access what they need for living,? said David Nabarro, head of a World Health Organisation (WHO) crisis team. 

 Authorities warned of many deaths from dysentery, cholera and typhoid fever caused by contaminated food and water, and malaria and dengue fever carried by mosquitoes. Indonesian aircraft dropped food to isolated areas in Aceh, areas that may not be reached by land for days.

 International efforts to aid victims are picking up pace, said UN officials, who dismissed as unfair suggestions that the response had been slow. Natural disasters posed complex logistical problems in getting assistance. 
 
 
 
 
 
Union health minister Anbumani Ramadoss, who was holidaying in Seychelles when disaster struck on Sunday, is now back in Chennai.

 The Prime Minister?s Office asked him to return to take stock of the situation and ensure that authorities are ready not just with supplies of medicines but a focused plan to prevent the outbreak of epidemics like cholera and dysentery.

 The health ministry, which appeared to have gone into slumber with Ramadoss out of the country, is now preparing for action after having reacted indifferently yesterday. Officials kept saying teams of doctors had been sent out to affected areas but there was no urgency to come to grips with the situation or anticipate the outbreak of diseases that invariably occur after such disasters.

 But today the ministry seemed to have been galvanised into action with the minister directing officials to ensure that many more medical teams are immediately dispatched to the affected areas. Ramadoss has also asked the Indian Council of Medical Research to assist state government efforts to provide relief to victims.

 ?It has been decided to outline relief interventions in the form of medical assistance, medicines, treatment methods and deployment of medical personnel for on-the-spot medical relief. State governments are also being provided technical guidelines on public health measure prepared by the National Institute of Communicable Disease for the control of waterborne diseases, vector-borne diseases, measles and disposal of bodies in emergency conditions,? the ministry said in a statement.

 Unicef has already reached the tsunami-hit areas of south India. The UN agency-supplied water tanks began arriving at relief camps in some of the worst-hit areas yesterday to provide safe drinking water to the disaster victims. The first set of 50 tanks were sent to Kancheepuram, Unicef statement released said.

 ?Getting clean water to people in the camps is critical at this point to head off the spread of disease,? said Lizette Burgers, Unicef?s chief of water and environmental sanitation, who visited Kancheepuram?s relief camps yesterday. ?We are closely monitoring the hygiene conditions in the relief areas. Some diarrhoea cases have already been reported, so providing oral rehydration solution is critical.?

 The agency is providing Tamil Nadu over 1,500 water tanks, each with a capacity of 500 litres. Three million chlorine tablets are being provided, along with 1,000 kg of bleaching powder and 50,000 sachets of oral rehydrates. Unicef is also supplying 38,000 light blankets and 10,000 cotton sheets to district governments.
