An Arab satellite television station showed today tapes of Chechen rebels saying they were ready to die for the independence of their homeland and to take the lives of infidel hostages seized in a Moscow theatre.

Al Jazeera television showed a tape of what it said was one of the women rebels saying: It makes no difference to us where we die and we chose to die here in Moscow and we will take with us the souls of the infidels.

She was one of five veiled women shown standing in front of a banner with God is great written on it in Arabic. Her comments were translated into Arabic. Jazeera also showed in a separate tape what it said was one of the male rebels seated in front of a laptop with a Quran by his side.

Each of us is ready to sacrifice for God and the independence of Chechnya. We seek death more than you seek life, said the man, who was also dressed in black.

Rebels in Moscow seized hundreds of theatre-goers as hostages yesterday in an attack believed to have been carried out by Chechen separatist guerrillas who have threatened to shoot their captives or blow up the building unless Russia pulled its troops out of their homeland.

We came to the Russian capital to stop the war or to die for the sake of God, said the man, adding that the rebels belonged to sabotage and reconnaissance military brigade in Chechnya.





The rich haul of arms and explosives from Gaya, Patna and Bokaro recently has revealed that territories under Maoist control have emerged as a huge market for international arms smugglers.

Patna police, led by senior superintendent Vineet Vinayak, arrested one Subodh Singh and his wife on Friday night from an upscale locality here in connection with the recovery of six bags of explosives, foreign-made pistols and rifles besides Naxalite literature.

The arms, Vinayak told reporters yesterday, could have been used by Naxalites in neighbouring Jharkhand, where the Assembly elections would be held from November 25 in five phases.

On the basis of Subodhs interrogation, the police also seized six vehicles belonging to a travel agency owned by one Prabhat Singh. From one car, 250 cartridges made in China and Pakistan were recovered. The seized vehicles were used for transporting the arms and ammunition to the Naxalites in several areas in Jharkhand and Bihar, the police have learnt.

Officers interrogating Subodh and other suspects said the rebels had many contacts masquerading as white-collar traders and professionals in Patna, Gaya and several towns in Jharkhand serving as conduit in supply of arms from smugglers to guerrilla cadres.        
	Central intelligence agencies, too, have indicated to their state counterparts that the Maoists were increasing their arsenal thanks to supply of arms from international smugglers. These officials believe that illegal arms from China were being supplied to rebel groups through the Indo-China borders in the Northeast and also through over 750km porous Indo-Nepal border in Bihar.        
	The white-collar traders, who own the vehicles and run travel agencies, according to investigating officers, have been ferrying the arms from the borders to the hinterlands where the Maoists are at war with the state. The seizure of arms in Patna, Gaya and Bokaro has yielded several peeled coconut size Chinese hand-grenades which are favourites with the guerrillas.        
	A senior special task force (STF) officer said that Chinese hand-grenades covered in polythene bags were also made available to the rebels in huge quantity. Besides, the Maoists were in possession of hundreds of pistols made in China and even in Pakistan.         
	Recently, the STF arrested two suspected Maoists from Khagaria in north Bihar on a tip-off and recovered two Pakistan-made semi-automatic pistols and two magazines from their possession.         
	On the other hand, Nepal police have formally complained to the Bihar police that criminals in the Himalayan nation were in possession of arms made in Munger.
