Heavy rain and melting snow in catchment areas in neighbouring Bulgaria as well as Erdine Province dramatically increased levels of the Tundzha, Meriç (Maritsa / Evros) and Arda rivers since 28 March, 2018.

The districts of Meriç and Erdine are among the worst affected. Roads, farmland, and homes close to the rivers have been damaged. Floodwaters have left some vehicles stranded and bridges over both the Tunca and Meriç rivers have been closed.

No injuries, fatalities or evacuations have been reported.

BNPB reported a major flood in Mamuju Regency, West Sulawesi, on 22 March 2018. Over 3,000 people were affected, 1,089 houses were inundated and 7 people injured. The most affected areas were Simboro and Mamuju districts.

The flood was caused by heavy rainfall which caused Rimuku, Karema and Mamyunyu rivers to overflow.

Local disaster officials said that 9,300 people have been affected due to the flooding.

The floods have prompted the Mayor of Samarinda city to declare emergency status to help expedite the disbursement of relief and recovery funds.

Observers said that the last time Samarinda city experienced flooding at this level was 25 years ago.

Indonesia's National Disaster Management Authority (BNPB) said that so far this year, more people have died in landslides in Indonesia than any other type of natural disaster.

Since 01 January 2018 there have been 197 landslides in the country, which have left 53 people dead, 60 injured and 1,369 homes damaged.

Since 01 January this year 34 people have died in floods in Indonesia, 12 in tornadoes and 1 in an earthquake.

Russia's Ministry of Emergency Situations EMERCOM reports that melting snow and ice jams have caused flooding in Altai Krai Region.

As of 27 March, flooding had affected 55 rural settlements, in particular in Krasnoschekovsky, Tretyakovsky, Charyshsky districts.

EMERCOM said that 1,146 homes were flooded and 1,029 people evacuated. The two small settlements of Ust-Kozluha and Maralaha in Krasnoschekovsky district have been almost completely evacuated as a precaution when the Reka Maralikha river threatened to flood the villages.

Around 1,500 EMERCOM personnel and 440 units of equipment have been deployed to alleviate flooding issues. Teams are working on pumping water, as well as delivering basic food products and providing assistance to the affected communities.

The flooding was caused by melting snow and ice jams in rivers, along with some rain. EMERCOM said the situation has been worsened by the fact that the ground is frozen and unable to absorb the melting snow and rain.

 Emergency services were called on to rescue over 40 people from the flooding. This is the fifth serious flood event in the state in the last few weeks.

Port Douglas recorded 593 mm of rain in 24 hours to 26 March, 2018. Abingdon Downs Station
recorded 405 mm of rain in 24 hours the next day.

During Monday, Australia's Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) said they observed rainfall in excess of 100 mm per hour to the west of Cairns and near Tully.

Local media reported on 24 March that at least 7 people died when a bus was swept away by a flooded river in Lesotho.

The incident occurred in the district of Thaba Tseka, Lesotho, when a mini-bus carrying 15 passengers attempted to cross a bridge over the swollen Linakeng River on Thursday, 22 March 2018.

Eight passengers managed to escape the flood waters. The bodies of the remaining seven passengers were found along various parts of the river on Saturday, 24 March.

Areas around Johannesburg and Pretoria were particularly badly hit. Strong winds have downed trees and heavy rain had flooded several roads, causing major traffic problems.

A massive sinkhole appeared on the M24 Route between Gauteng and Valhalla.

The Johannesburg Roads Agency (JRA) has asked road users to be careful following heavy rains, particularly when crossing bridges.

The heavy rain also caused some rivers to overflow, including the Hennops river, which has flooded wide areas of Centurion, south west of Pretoria.

According to Associated Press reports, at least 16 people were rescued from flood waters during the storm. No fatalities were reported.

Two people were rescued by passers-by after their vehicle was swept away by flood water in Canyon Country in the city of Santa Clarita.

Emergency teams were called on to carry out rescues in the Salinas River in San Luis Obispo County (10), Los Angeles River in the Sepulveda Basin (1), Tuolumne County (2) and in Folsom, Sacramento County (1).

Minor flooding has peaked on the Williams River today, with minor rural impacts experienced. There is minor flooding occurring on the upper Hastings River at Kindee Bridge. Minor flooding is no longer occurring on the Paterson River.

In the Mid-North Coast area, Bowraville recorded 83 mm of rain between 22 and 23 March. Further areas of heavy rain are possible overnight Friday 23 March, but easing on Saturday.

As of 23 March, New South Wales State Emergency Service (NSW SES) had received over 2,200 calls in the State Operations Centre resulting in 1,062 emergency responses with a substantial number of these around the Maitland, Lake Macquarie and Newcastle areas and the Mid-North Coast.

NSW SES have carried out 10 flood rescues, including 8 people who had driven into floodwater.

Two other victims were rescued by helicopter on 23 March. One was a farmer stranded on a flood island, and the other a kayaker who was swept downstream. Both rescues were near Wingham with both persons safe and well, according to SES.

The NSW SES said it has received almost 1,000 calls in the State Operations Centre resulting in 374 emergency responses with a substantial number of these around the Maitland, Lake Macquarie and Newcastle areas.

Emergency teams were called on to carry out 3 flood rescues of people trapped in vehicles. NSW SES said all persons are safe and well.

Strong winds, heavy rain and floods affected several departments in southern Uruguay between 17 and 19 March, 2018, causing around 70 people to be evacuated.

Carrasco, near Montevideo, recorded 173 mm of rain in 24 hours to 19 March.

Uruguays Sistema Nacional de Emergencias (SINAE) said that at least 20 people were evacuated in the department of Canelones, where flooding affected the towns of Paso Carrasco, Barros Blancos and La Floresta. Emergency service received 345 requests for help due to flooding. All those displaced have since returned to their homes.

The intense rains were accompanied by lightning strikes, strong winds of 60 km/h and hail in some parts of the country,

In Montevideo department there were 300 calls for emergency assistance calls, including around 80 for flooding. Around 15 people were evacuated from their homes in the department.

In the department of San José, 6 people evacuated in Playa Pascual. Eight were evacuated after flooding in Colonia department. In Maldonado, over 20 evacuations were carried out in the city of Maldonado and Piriápolis.

The storm downed more than 80 trees across the city. São Paulo Civil Defense reported over 50 incidents of flooding. Levels of the Pinheiros river that runs through the city remain high after the storm.

The wall of a house collapsed in Vila Diva, Água Rasa district as a result of heavy rain and flooding, leaving one person dead. Three other residents were rescued by emergency services.

The second fatality occurred in the neighbourhood of Água Branca in Barra Funda district, when a child was swept into flood water. The flooding caused several houses to collapse in the area and over 100 families were evacuated.

Other evacuations were necessary after more homes collapsed in Butantã district (around 100 families) and in the neighbourhood of Paraisopolis in Vila Andrade district.

In the Mid-North Coast area, Bowraville recorded 83 mm of rain between 22 and 23 March. Further areas of heavy rain are possible overnight Friday 23 March, but easing on Saturday.

As of 23 March, New South Wales State Emergency Service (NSW SES) had received over 2,200 calls in the State Operations Centre resulting in 1,062 emergency responses with a substantial number of these around the Maitland, Lake Macquarie and Newcastle areas and the Mid-North Coast.

NSW SES have carried out 10 flood rescues, including 8 people who had driven into floodwater.

Two other victims were rescued by helicopter on 23 March. One was a farmer stranded on a flood island, and the other a kayaker who was swept downstream. Both rescues were near Wingham with both persons safe and well, according to SES.

On Tuesday, 20 March, authorities issued evacuation orders for around 30,000 people in Santa Barbara County, including Montecito, the location of the catastrophic mudslides in January this year.

Areas of the county suffered major burns scars in the forest fires last year making them particularly vulnerable to mudslides. This is the fifth time some residents of the county have evacuated since the fires.

Some flooding and debris flows affected some areas, closing roads. Overall Santa Barbara County escaped the worst of the storm this time around. Evacuation orders were lifted on Thursday.

Mark Johnson, National Weather Service meteorologist, said that the debris basins and creek clearings had done their job.

Los Angeles County also cancelled evacuation orders for Kagel Canyon, Lopez Canyon, and Little Tujunga. However, as of 22 March, evacuation orders La Tuna Canyon area remained in place due to a landslide in the area.

A landslide triggered by heavy rain left at least 6 people dead and 3 injured in Burundi.

The incident occurred early on 16 March near the Gasenyi river in the east of the capital, Bujumbura, where heavy rain caused a hillside to collapse.

Burundi police said the landslide was near National Highway 1 in the city. Police later confirmed that search teams had found 6 bodies and 3 injured. It is thought that the victims were construction workers who were working on engineering projects along the river.

Another disaster also struck in Bujumbura that morning, when a building collapsed in the Buterere neighbourhood of the city. It is not clear why the building collapsed.

The Red Cross said that volunteers of the Burundi Red Cross, in collaboration with the ICRC and civil protection, are looking for people estimated between 30 and 50 who still remain under the rubble. As of 16:00, Burundi Red Cross volunteers had evacuated 15 wounded and one dead.

By 17 March, Burundi police confirmed that search and rescue operations were complete and that 3 people died and 43 were injured.

As of 16 March local media reported flood-related deaths in Mwingi, Isiolo, Kajiado, Narok and Makueni. Hundreds have been forced to evacuate their homes.

Kenya Red Cross reported via Social Media that a lorry with five people on board (was) swept away after River Enzui in Kasiluni village, Kitui, bursts its bank. Search and rescue efforts ongoing.

Nairobi was once again hard hit by the flooding. Kenya Red Cross reported that 2 schools in Nairobi's Mukuru informal settlements were cut off after the Ngong River bursts its banks. Around 9 schools in total have been closed in Nairobi because of flooding.

Some bridges have been swept away and roads have been closed, including the Nairobi-Mombasa Highway after floods washed away a bridge over the Athi River.

Maroantsetra, Andilamena, Ambilobe, Mandritsara, Brickaville and Toamasina were reportedly the worst affected by the storm.

Madagascar's Bureau for Risk and Disaster Management (BNGRC) said that, as of 18 March, 17 people had died and the storm had affected over 15,000. Over 1,200 homes have been damaged and 648 destroyed, leaving over 6,000 people displaced.

Local media report that over 500 homes and businesses have been damaged. Comedores Económicos del Estado (CEED), the social service agency in the Dominican Republic, has distributed almost 6,000 meals as well as food supply packages to the affected populations, including the areas of Montellano, Sosúa, Playa Oeste, Aguas Negras and Rescate Ambar.

The severe weather struck during the evening of 15 March when it rained non-stop for around 7 hours. Further rain during the following days caused the San Marcos river and other smaller streams to overflow, flooding the neighborhoods (barrios) of Invi, Barrio Haiti, Los Domíngues and Las Mercedez.
