Big B balm on drought
 CHANDRIMA S. BHATTACHARYA				 	 Bachchan: Healing touchMumbai, May 7: Western Maharashtra, reeling under severe drought, has got a healing touch. Amitabh Bachchan has decided to bring relief to two drought-affected villages there by adopting them.																								The superstar will provide mid-day meals to about 500 villagers of Kumthe and Upalavi for a month. These villages belong to the Tazgaon taluka of Sangli district. Along with Solapur and Kohlapur, Sangli is one of the severely drought-affected districts of western Maharashtra.																								Bachchans programme, which will be co-ordinated by the NGO Yuva Biradari, will start on May 11 and continue for a month. It is not clear to what extent the actor will be involved personally  it has not yet been decided whether he will visit the villages. We will only know the extent of Mr Bachchans involvement in a months time, said Rekha Shah, a trustee.																								The scheme is another instance of charity beginning at home, as the actors wife Jaya heads Yuva Biradari. Cricketer Ajit Wadekar and editor Kumar Ketkar are also on the board.																								Though Bachchans charity may not burn a hole in his pocket  the scheme may not cost him more than Rs 2 lakh  his gesture will be invaluable, feels the NGO.																								We havent heard of any deaths, but these villages are starving. Mr Bachchans association with this cause will help us to bring it into focus, and hopefully encourage other people and generate more funds, said Shah.																								The situation in Sangli is very severe. We chose these villages because they are close to the Sangli district town and more convenient in terms of communication and transport, she added.																								Kumthe, like many other villages in the district, was famous for its grapes till now. But because of the drought that has affected the region for more than two years, grapes and other agricultural produce like sugarcane have suffered acutely. More than 30 sugar mills have closed down, leaving 5,000 workers jobless.																								Bachchans name may go some way in bringing the succour it badly needs.																								This is the first time that a celebrity has adopted a village-in-need; though Aamir Khan provided relief to Kanuria, a village in Bhuj that was devastated by the earthquake in 2001.
 
 
 

Industry breathes life into quake-hit 
Bhuj, Feb. 19 (Reuters): A security guard in a bright blue uniform frisks Baburam Humble at the iron gate before he is let into the newly-built factory office where he works.																								Humble then punches in to begin a long day of taking orders from superiors and attending to the factorys steady stream of visitors. But he is not complaining.																								I was completely at a loss after the earthquake, not knowing how to face the tragedy, the 29-year-old said.																								This new factory has given me not only a livelihood, but also the strength to forget what happened in 2001.																								Measuring 6.7 on the Richter scale, the earthquake had killed nearly 20,000 people and flattened residential complexes and businesses across large parts here.																								Humble, who lost all his savings after the concrete-roofed house he shared with his four brothers collapsed in the quake, has begun a new chapter in his life with Rs 2,500 a month he earns from the detergent and chemical factory.																								Three years on, 150 industrial units are already functional or under construction in the Kutch region, and the development is transforming the region into a major industrial hub.																								Like Humble, thousands of Kutchis from this arid region on the Pakistan border are now rebuilding their lives with help from the industrial community, which, in turn, gets tax breaks for setting up there.																								The huge piles of debris and mangled metal from the flattened buildings in Bhuj, Anjar and Bachhau, three major towns destroyed by the quake, are giving way to multi-storied buildings and factories protected by iron gates and barbed wire fences.																								The tax breaks are helping Kutch gain an altogether new look, said F.S. Negi, general manager at PSL Holdings Ltd, which makes 60,000 tonnes of steel pipes per year. It is also helping quake survivors find much-needed livelihoods.																								In an attempt to spur investment and generate employment for those hit hardest by the quake, the central and state governments offer a maximum 24 per cent tax rebate for up to 10 years for industrial units set up between July 31, 2001, and July 31, 2004.																								While 81 small and medium-sized projects with an estimated investment of Rs 5 billion are already working, 58 projects worth a total investment of Rs 25 billion are at various stages of implementation.																								And a total of nearly Rs 31 billion has been pledged for fresh investments in sectors as diverse as edible oil refining, detergent and soap manufacturing, metal pipes and ceramic tiles.																								Officials of Gujarat Industrial Extension Bureau, which is leading the initiative to attract investors, say the new units will directly generate at least 80,000 jobs as well as several hundred thousands indirect jobs.																								These new investments are not only generating employment, it has added to the confidence of the local masses, H.C. Desai, the bureaus chief general manager, said.																								Derawar Singh, an 18-year-old migrant from neighbouring Rajasthan, is one beneficiary of Kutchs new industrial activity.																								I earn enough to run my family of five back home because of this new factory. Maybe I can earn more with units coming up, said Singh, who runs a restaurant in an industrial area near Anjar.																								The presence of two major ports on the west coast, the state-run Kandla and privately operated Mundra, and better road and rail networks are also helping Kutchs mushrooming industry.																								The ports are a major attraction. Kutch also has a locational advantage as it can cater to the vast north and western hinterland of India, said Negi.																								Officials say Kutchs new-found status as an investment magnet has sharply pushed up land prices.



WHEN NATURAL CALAMITY STRIKES Shobita Punja																					January 26, 2001 at 8.46 am, when the nation was preparing to celebrate our 52nd Republic Day, an earthquake struck the state of Gujarat. It was of enormous magnitude, between 7-8 points on the Richter scale with its epicentre just 20 kilometres northeast of Bhuj. The death and destruction that followed the earthquake spread over 15,000 kilometres with the loss of life estimated at 20,000, apart from loss of livestock and crores worth of property.																					The earthquake took everyone by surprise, but that is the character of natural calamities. No one was prepared for this scale of devastation and the lack of facilities was evident on many fronts  most important was the instant distribution of medical care on a large scale.																					In terms of the irreplaceable loss of national, cultural and historic assets of Gujarat, the earthquake exposed another aspect of our lack of preparedness and concern. The Archaeological Survey of India and the state department of archaeology in subsequent weeks estimated that over 900 protected monuments had been affected by the earthquake and needed urgent attention. The region of Kutch, known to be in the seismic zone with a record of tremors every 30-50 years, has one of Indias most beautiful traditions of vernacular building and extraordinary crafts traditions of communities who have adapted to the harsh near-desert environment over centuries.																					The 100-year-old Kutch Museum had caved in and buried rare antiques and art treasures in the rubble. The Aaina Mahal, palace of the rulers of Bhuj, that had partially been converted into a museum, lay in ruins, shrouding its precious objects in dust.																					Leveller																					The earthquake, like all natural phenomena, made no distinction between caste or religion or class and colour and devastated the Jubilee Hospital, the Fateh Mohammeds tomb, the Kalyaneshwar Temple, the Jail and the Alfred School in Bhuj.																					The beautiful Chattris outside Bhuj, erected to commemorate the royal family, was a favourite set for Bollywood films such as Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam. The majestic Chattris have now been reduced to rubble and ruins.																					The Rajkot area lost Jain and Hindu temples, dargahs and mosques of the medieval period. Even in Ahmedabad the quake damaged Gandhis historic meeting place, the Hriday Kunj, where he had sat spinning his charka in the Sabarmati Ashram.																					The clock tower at the Ranjit Vilas palace in Wankaner was seriously damaged and the clock had stopped at 8.46 am.																					May Republic Day each year be a reminder for all of us that we are not prepared. Each one of us must ask should an earthquake, flood, natural disaster happen unexpectedly today somewhere in India  do we have a task force to bring aid immediately to the injured and the dying, food and shelter for the homeless and helpless?																					Always on alert																					We need to have a well-formulated and rehearsed strategy for the protection and conservation of homes and private property. The Archaeological Survey of India and the state department of archaeology should have a manual for the protection of historic and cultural property during natural calamities. These departments must train their staff on how to respond efficiently and effectively during times of disaster.																					A photographic record and listing of historic and culturally important buildings of each city of India should be undertaken now. We need adequate documentation ready to help us repair and restore these buildings of historic value to their former glory.																					For people who have been traumatized, the psychological effect of restoring landmarks of a city, is immediately reassuring. When they see familiar landmarks again, when temples and mosques are back in use, the old post office and schools are working again  healing begins. When the majestic clock tower is chiming again telling us to get on with life once more, it should also remind us that anything can happen anytime  be prepared.




The Prime Minister today promised Narendra Modi that he would forward his request for a tax holiday for Kutch to finance minister Jaswant Singh.																								Atal Bihari Vajpayee made this promise while dedicating the multi-speciality GK General Hospital, reconstructed from the Prime Ministers Relief Fund, to the people of Kutch.																								The Gujarat chief minister, known for fiery speeches and abrasive behaviour, broke down while recalling the January 26, 2001, earthquake that devastated Kutch and also affected the rest of the state.																								I salute the zeal of (the) Kutchhi people, Modi said in a choked voice.																								The chief minister went on to recall the help he had received from the Prime Minister in tackling the disaster. He said Gujarat had recovered from the earthquake in less than three years. Japan, Mexico and Turkey have taken longer to rebuild after suffering earthquakes in recent years, Modi added.																								But this was possible with the cooperation and supervision of the Prime Minister, he said, describing Vajpayee as a father figure who had taught him how to walk.																								Vajpayee recalled the heart-rending scenes he witnessed at GK Hospital that collapsed during the quake, killing 182 people. He described the reconstruction as victory of life over death and said he saw tremendous scope for the hospital to expand.																								Dedicating the 300-bed hospital to the nation, the Prime Minister promised to open a medical college in Bhuj. 																								He offered central assistance for a corpus for this state-of-the-art hospital, which is to be run with the help of public sector units.																								Vajpayee said the hospital could become a major centre for medicare and medical tourism. A nursing college has already started, he said, adding that there should now be a medical college in Bhuj.																								On the demand for a tax holiday, he said: I will work as your postman to convey your demand to the finance minister.																								The Prime Minister said Gujarat had done well in medicare but should strive to improve the human development index as it still lags behind in literacy and health care.																								GK Hospital has been rebuilt with earthquake-resistant technology developed on the New Zealand model of base-isolation technology that can withstand quakes as high as 8 on the Richter scale. The technology uses lead-rubber bearings to isolate and protect structures during earthquakes.																								Earlier, Modi announced that Gujarat would soon have a world-class seismic institute. 																								He revealed that Vajpayee was so concerned about post-quake relief that he had appointed an officer to look after rehabilitation and monitored the progress.





Few disasters in living memory have achieved in scale of intensity and spread the devastation in seven countries caused by the rubbing of the Indian Ocean and Eurasian tectonic plates off the Sumatran coast. The earthquake was the biggest in 40 years, but it was the violently disturbed sea that burst onto the coasts ringing the Bay of Bengal to destroy and kill. The tsunami travelled miles to cause deaths in as far away as Kenya and Somalia. It was a tragic evocation of the earthquake in Iran on December 26 last year, but it was not completely unexpected. A team of seismologists led by two scientists of the Madras University?s applied geology department had predicted the date, time and place of the quake correctly, but had given a more optimistic prediction about its intensity. There is obviously a tragic disjunction between scientific findings and practical policies of defence and protection, which only national governments can implement. It seems even sadder that a proposal to put in place tsunami warning systems or tide gauges in countries around the Indian Ocean had been ignored since tsunamis were not common in the region.

 The destruction caused by the immense forces that moved earth and sea could not have been completely avoided. Yet something could have been saved, certainly numberless lives. In India, which is knowledgeable about many kinds of natural disasters but totally unacquainted with tsunami, the coastal toll has been terrible. What was remarkable was the fearlessness of the local people in immediate rescue operations, while the response from the government was prompt and coordinated. But this is the beginning of a long and painful story. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands have taken a hideous battering, while very little information can be got from some islands in the Maldives, a favourite tourist destination. In India, Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka and the Maldives, it is not merely the toll in lives, livelihoods, and property that will have to be counted, but the damage to infrastructure, the threat to health and, especially in the regions most dependent on tourism, the damage to the economy.

 Natural disasters are peculiar levellers. The 26 years of fierce insurgency in Aceh in Sumatra had made it difficult of access when it took the first brunt of the quake. Now the government and aid agencies are struggling to reach it, while loosened land mines planted in Sri Lanka by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam have increased accidents. Will there be less hostility while all sides count their dead? The only thing that human beings can do is use all the scientific and technical expertise at their command as defence against irresistible natural forces that take no account of hostile times and festive times, of the very young and the very old, of the poor fisherman and of the rich tourist.
 
 
 
 
 

Hospital balm on AIDS alarm

 OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT

 A spurt in the number of HIV/AIDS cases detected in a city centre has coincided with the call for a hospital dedicated to address the disease.

 At the School of Tropical Medicine, the nodal centre for HIV/AIDS treatment in the state, 608 patients out of over 1,000 have tested positive for the virus in the past eight months.

 The city on Friday was also told that it would get its first hospital dedicated to treatment of the disease. This was announced by the Calcutta diocese of the Church of North India (CNI).

 More than five million people are suffering from this disease in India. We are concerned because it is spreading very rapidly, said P.S.P. Raju, bishop of the Calcutta diocese, following an AIDS sensitisation programme in CNI schools.

 One possibility is that the hospital begins on an existing but revamped premises in the Maniktala area.

 If that plan works out, the AIDS hospital should be up and running by January 2005, CNI sources said on Friday. But the possibility of a new hospital premises at some other location has not be ruled out, either.

 A series of awareness programmes, to involve students, teachers and principals of CNI schools, including La Martiniere, St James and Pratt Memorial, will also start shortly.

 The need for intervention in the city has never been greater. Of the new cases detected at the School of Tropical Medicine, 578 patents were from the city, a figure which, experts believe, is likely to go up in the next four months, taking this years tally far beyond that of last year.

 In 2003, over 1,200 tested positive at the School of Tropical Medicine, but the number from the city was smaller.

 The vulnerable age-group is the 20-35 years bracket and, while most infections are because of unprotected sex, some were also due to contaminated blood transfusions, said Bhibuti Saha, head of the department, tropical medicine.

 The School of Tropical Medicine disclosure comes close on the heels of a survey conducted by the National AIDS Control Organisation that monitors HIV infection nationally. It concluded that besides Delhi, Bengal is a cause of concern in terms of new infections.

 The number of mother-to-child infections has also shot up. The survey said there has been a 250 per cent increase in the number of HIV infections from unprotected sex and another 50 per cent in the number of mother-to-child infections.

 State government officials have agreed to extend support to the CNI hospital project. A team from social welfare organisations under the CNI, Delhi, were in the city this week to visit slums.

 We were surprised to find that many women have heard about AIDS but they do not know how fatal the disease is. We need to provide people with the necessary information, explained Karuna Roy, a Delhi-based HIV/AIDS counsellor.
 
 
 
 
 
Chandrababu Naidu wanted to make Andhra Pradesh a role model in development.

 But within months of his exit as chief minister, a recently released survey indicates that the state is going the South Africa way ? with a big jump in its number of HIV positive people.

 An annual survey conducted by the Andhra Pradesh AIDS Control Society ? each state AIDS Control Society puts out a similar surveillance report on HIV incidence ? has found that the number of HIV positive people in the state has shot up by 21 per cent over the last year.

 Andhra now has 4.8 lakh HIV positive people and ranks second only to Maharashtra in HIV incidence, at 13 per cent of the national average.

 The startling numbers have Dr K. Damayanti, project director of the state AIDS Control Society, saying: ?AP (Andhra Pradesh) is today what South Africa was a decade ago in HIV positive (incidence).?

 The society has recorded a sale of 65 million condoms over the last year. But, as the reports says: ?The number is not enough and touched hardly 30 per cent of the AIDS prospective population (people who are HIV positive and might contract AIDS).?

 The report says HIV incidence is highest in Guntur (3.75 per cent) and Prakasham (3 per cent) districts, both of which have a large floating population. Kadapa, Nellore, Karimnagar and West Godavari districts rank next, with 2 per cent incidence.

 Tirupati is the town with the highest HIV rate in the state ? 39 per cent ? attributable to its huge floating population. Hyderabad ranks next with 36 per cent, followed by Visakhapatanam (29 per cent), Vijayawada (28 per cent) and Rajahmundry (24 per cent).

 The AIDS society report says condom sale has increased by 32 per cent over the last year, but the high rate of HIV incidence indicates there could be a lack of awareness about its proper use. ?Nearly 65 million rubbers are sold during last year. But the incidence (of HIV positive people) has also shot up by 21 per cent over the last year,? Dr Damayanti says.

 She says HIV prevalence among pregnant women is a comparatively low 2.3 per cent in Guntur, Prakasham, Kadapa, Nellore, Karimnagar and West Godavari districts. ?But it has downsized to 1.25 per cent in other districts thanks to propaganda and awareness campaigns,? the project director says.
 
 
 
 
Disposable syringe on phase-out path 

 BAPPA MAJUMDAR

 Disposable syringes are on their way out from government hospitals in the city. 

 Safer auto-disabled (AD) syringes will take their place.

 Unlike disposable or glass syringes, the AD variety can never be reused as it punctures automatically the moment the injection is pushed into the human body.

 Worried over the rising cases of HIV infection and the possibilities of hepatitis B or C outbreak, thanks to unsafe injection practices, the government has placed an order for 2.5 lakh AD syringes with a Delhi-based firm, at an estimated cost of Rs 8 lakh.

 ?Unsafe injections can cost lives. So, we have decided to introduce the latest technology to minimise the chances of infection,? director of medical education C.R. Maiti explained to Metro on Friday. 

 Of late, the West Bengal Aids Control Society has been using AD syringes on an experimental basis. The government?s decision is based on a ?favourable? report submitted by the Society.

 ?Since the cost difference between a disposable and an AD syringe is not much ? Rs 3 to be precise ? we have decided to use the new ones more often. But phasing out the existing syringes will take some time,? Maiti added.

 According to the latest findings of the World Health Organisation (WHO), of an estimated 16 billion injections administered worldwide, millions are unsafe, causing deadly infections such as AIDS and hepatitis B and C. 

 In India, 65 per cent of the injections are considered unsafe. Around two million new hepatitis B cases, 400,000 new hepatitis C cases and 30,000 new HIV/AIDS cases are reported from all the states, including Bengal. 

 The figures emerged from a joint study by the Union health ministry, the clinical epidemiology unit of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and the World Bank.

 In Bengal, of the HIV cases reported over the past few years, several could have been caused by unsafe syringes. ?There is no way of finding out how the infections are spreading, but we cannot take chances. Hence, the decision to use AD syringes,? said a senior state health intelligence official.

 Following raids on and the busting of several rackets, the police have come to know that certain organised groups have been recycling disposable syringes and sending them back to the market.

 The Indian Medical Association (IMA), too, has taken a big step towards popularising the use of AD syringes in its recent ?Policy on Safe Injections?. 

 ?We are emphasising the importance of safe injections among our members. Hopefully, things will get better,? said R.D. Dubey, IMA joint secretary (headquarters).
 
 
 
 
 
 
Epidemic alert rings loud

 - Heat 

 on g8 to tackle ?worst cataclysm of modern era? 

 A damaged McDonald?s mannequin inside a destroyed restaurant in Phuket, Thailand. (AFP)

 Banda Aceh (Indonesia), Dec. 30 (Reuters): The death toll in the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster soared above 125,000 today as millions scrambled for food and fresh water.

 Aid agencies warned many more, from Indonesia to Sri Lanka, could die in epidemics if shattered communications and transport hampered what may prove history?s biggest relief operation. 

 Rescue workers pressed on into isolated villages shattered by a disaster that could yet eclipse a cyclone that struck Bangladesh in 1991, killing 138,000 people.

 Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi called for an emergency meeting of the Group of Eight so that the rich nations club could discuss aid and possible debt reduction following ?the worst cataclysm of the modern era?.

 The total toll had shot up more than 50 per cent in a day with still no clear picture of conditions in some isolated islands and villages around India and Indonesia. While villagers and fishermen suffered devastation, losses among foreign tourists, essential to local economies, mounted.

 Prime Minister Goran Persson said more than 1,000 Swedes may have been killed in the disaster. Indonesian health ministry sources said just under 80,000 had died in the northern Aceh province that was close to the undersea quake, some 28,000 more than previously announced. Two sources said the toll would be officially announced soon.

 The airport of the main city, Banda Aceh, was busy with aid flights, but residents said little was getting through to them. Hungry crowds jostling for aid biscuits besieged people delivering them in the town. Some drivers dared not stop.

 ?Some cars come by and throw food like that. The fastest get the food, the strong one wins. The elderly and the injured don?t get anything. We feel like dogs,? said Usman, 43.

 Residents of the city fled their homes when two aftershocks revived fresh memories of the worst earthquake in 40 years. ?I was sleeping, but fled outside in panic. If I am going to die, I will die here. Just let it be,? said Kaspian, 26.

 ?This isn?t just a situation of giving out food and water. Entire towns and villages need to be rebuilt from the ground up,? said Rod Volway of CARE Canada, whose emergency team was one of the first into Aceh. 

 ?As many as 5 million people are not able to access what they need for living,? said David Nabarro, head of a World Health Organisation (WHO) crisis team. 

 Authorities warned of many deaths from dysentery, cholera and typhoid fever caused by contaminated food and water, and malaria and dengue fever carried by mosquitoes. Indonesian aircraft dropped food to isolated areas in Aceh, areas that may not be reached by land for days.

 International efforts to aid victims are picking up pace, said UN officials, who dismissed as unfair suggestions that the response had been slow. Natural disasters posed complex logistical problems in getting assistance. 
 
 
 
 
 
Union health minister Anbumani Ramadoss, who was holidaying in Seychelles when disaster struck on Sunday, is now back in Chennai.

 The Prime Minister?s Office asked him to return to take stock of the situation and ensure that authorities are ready not just with supplies of medicines but a focused plan to prevent the outbreak of epidemics like cholera and dysentery.

 The health ministry, which appeared to have gone into slumber with Ramadoss out of the country, is now preparing for action after having reacted indifferently yesterday. Officials kept saying teams of doctors had been sent out to affected areas but there was no urgency to come to grips with the situation or anticipate the outbreak of diseases that invariably occur after such disasters.

 But today the ministry seemed to have been galvanised into action with the minister directing officials to ensure that many more medical teams are immediately dispatched to the affected areas. Ramadoss has also asked the Indian Council of Medical Research to assist state government efforts to provide relief to victims.

 ?It has been decided to outline relief interventions in the form of medical assistance, medicines, treatment methods and deployment of medical personnel for on-the-spot medical relief. State governments are also being provided technical guidelines on public health measure prepared by the National Institute of Communicable Disease for the control of waterborne diseases, vector-borne diseases, measles and disposal of bodies in emergency conditions,? the ministry said in a statement.

 Unicef has already reached the tsunami-hit areas of south India. The UN agency-supplied water tanks began arriving at relief camps in some of the worst-hit areas yesterday to provide safe drinking water to the disaster victims. The first set of 50 tanks were sent to Kancheepuram, Unicef statement released said.

 ?Getting clean water to people in the camps is critical at this point to head off the spread of disease,? said Lizette Burgers, Unicef?s chief of water and environmental sanitation, who visited Kancheepuram?s relief camps yesterday. ?We are closely monitoring the hygiene conditions in the relief areas. Some diarrhoea cases have already been reported, so providing oral rehydration solution is critical.?

 The agency is providing Tamil Nadu over 1,500 water tanks, each with a capacity of 500 litres. Three million chlorine tablets are being provided, along with 1,000 kg of bleaching powder and 50,000 sachets of oral rehydrates. Unicef is also supplying 38,000 light blankets and 10,000 cotton sheets to district governments.
Hurricane Ivan batters Jamaica

 Kingston (Jamaica), Sept. 11 (Reuters): Deadly Hurricane Ivan battered Jamaica with powerful winds and torrential rains today but spared the island the worst of its wrath as the eye skirted the shore and headed for the Cayman Islands and Cuba.

 The storm felled large trees and poles, flooded streets, swept away houses, and left the island in the dark. Sporadic shooting broke out on the deserted streets of the capital when looters went on the rampage. Ivan, which has already killed 27 people and left a trail of devastation across the Caribbean, veered west just as it approached Jamaica and skirted the southern shore instead of plowing through the island.

 At 0900 GMT, Ivans winds had weakened slightly to 240 kmph but remained a powerful and deadly Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale of 1-5. 

 Ivan?s eye was about 112 km south of Montego Bay, Jamaica, at latitude 17.5 north and longitude 78 west, the US National Hurricane Center said.

 The storm was moving west-northwest or northwest at about 13 kmph and at this rate, Ivan was expected to reach the Cayman Islands, a British territory, in 24 hours before heading for Cuba tomorrow and then to Florida on Monday.
 
 
 
Florida reels in Frances fury

 A resident walks her dog as Hurricane Frances slams into south Florida. (AFP)

 Cocoa, Florida, Sept. 5 Reuters): Hurricane Frances roared into eastern Florida with stinging rains and fierce winds that ripped away roofs, trees and boat moorings and cut power to 1.3 million homes and businesses.

 The massive storm crept over Floridas Atlantic coast, where 2.5 million people had been told to flee inland.

 Florida evacuees waited nervously while the storm stalled for two days over the Bahamas. Then yesterday, Frances hammered Floridas Atlantic coast with 160 kph wind gusts and promised to dump torrential rain on the peninsula for up to 15 hours in what emergency officials said could be a marathon of anxiety and devastation.

 In Floridas central Atlantic coast counties, blinding rain squalls drove clouds of sand into the air while huge white-caps thundered onto the beaches. Palm trees rained coconuts and then toppled over as the eye wall, the most powerful area of the storm bordering the calm eye, moved ashore.

 In hard-hit Palm Beach County, boats broke from their moorings and were dragged by the wind until they snagged on bridges or other obstacles. Power lines snapped and sparked while lightning illuminated blacked-out beach towns and flood waters submerged cars in low-lying parking garages.

 The Texas-sized storm covered much of the state as its huge eye began to cross the coastline late yesterday, promising a pause in the assault. Forecasters said the eye could take 12 hours to pass, and warned people not to take false comfort in the respite as the brutal second half of the storm approached.

 People do need to be very careful when those winds do slacken off in the eye. Weve still got the back side to deal with, said National Hurricane Center director Max Mayfield.

 President George W. Bush yesterday declared Florida a major disaster and ordered federal aid to make grants and loans available in five coastal counties in Central Florida: Brevard, Indian River, Martin, Palm Beach and St. Lucie.

 State officials reported some 71,000 people in public shelters, including some left homeless by Hurricane Charley, which caused $7.4 billion in insured losses and killed more than 20 people when it hit Floridas southwest coast three weeks ago.

 Local television reported one shelter resident died of a heart attack as Frances howled ashore.

 At 0300 GMT, the centre of the storm was about 56 km northeast of West Palm Beach, Florida, at latitude 27.1 north and longitude 79.7 west, the US National Hurricane Center in Miami said.

 The hurricane was moving west-northwest at about 7 kph on a path that could take its eye some 128 km wide over central Florida, the Florida Panhandle and then into Alabama by Tuesday.

 The storms top sustained winds were near 170 kph, well down from the devastating 235-kph winds of two days ago but strong enough to uproot trees, down power lines and destroy mobile homes.
 
 
 
Super storm stalks US

 Rain lashes Boynton Beach, Florida. (Reuters)

 Cocoa (Florida), Sept. 4 (Reuters): Strong winds and whipping rains began to lash eastern Florida today as Hurricane Frances, an enormous storm, crept across the northern Bahamas toward the US.

 Although weaker than it had been, Frances promised to bring torrential rain to Floridas Atlantic coast, where 2.5 million people had been told to evacuate their homes, after delivering a long pounding to the Bahamas.

 Storm conditions were forecast to last between 12 and 15 hours. Federal emergency management agency director Michael Brown said people should not let their guard down because Frances had weakened, as it could still cause huge damage.

 (It is) a massive storm, Brown said. Unlike (recent Hurricane) Charley, this storm has an awful lot of moisture with it. This could be a very significant flooding event.

 In the Bahamas, the hurricane killed one person, blew off roofs, downed trees and power lines and caused widespread flooding in the 700-island archipelago that is home to 300,000 people.

 By noon GMT, the slow-moving storm was about 180 km east of West Palm Beach, Florida, and hanging over Freeport on Grand Bahama island, the US National Hurricane Center said.

 It was moving west-northwest at 9 kmph on a path that could mean its core would sweep ashore near Vero Beach, just south of Cape Canaveral where Nasas space shuttles are launched, early tomorrow.

 The storms top sustained winds were 170 kmph, well down from the devastating 235-kmph winds it carried a couple of days ago, but still strong enough to uproot trees, down power lines and wipe out mobile homes.

 Hurricane-force winds were expected to spread out 170 km from the center, but seemed likely to spare some of the most populated areas of Floridas east coast, such as Miami and Fort Lauderdale, from the full brunt of their fury. Charley, a more powerful but much smaller hurricane, caused $7.4 billion in insured losses and killed more than 20 people last month.

 Id like it to just do what it wants to do and get it over with, said Michael Conroy, 60, who was forced to abandon his beachfront home on Cape Canaveral island and seek shelter in a motel at Cocoa, farther inland.

 Im fed up with it. Whatever is going to happen, let it happen. Theres nothing I can do, he said. Thousands of people were likely to lose power after Frances nears the US coast and dumps up to 30 cm of rain on the Florida peninsula. 
 
 
 
 
Communities along the US east coast have begun a massive clean-up after Hurricane Isabel, with authorities approving disaster aid and sending truckloads of relief supplies, but local officials said it would take months to fix the damage.																								President George W. Bush signed disaster declarations for North Carolina, Virginia and Maryland, the hardest-hit areas, opening the way for federal assistance and aid programmes.																								The department of homeland security said it was coordinating the federal government response after Isabel ripped through the mid-Atlantic region, leaving at least 23 people dead.																								More that 70 truckloads of water, emergency meals, tents, cots, blankets, portable toilets, generators, plastic sheeting and roofing material had been sent to areas hit by floods and high winds, the department said.																								The director of the federal emergency management Agency, Michael Brown, told people to be cautious when returning to their homes.																								While the immediate danger is past, there are downed power lines, high water and other dangers that still threaten public safety, he said. Clean-up crews worked to clear thousands of fallen trees and fix downed electrical power lines as utilities said they were restoring services to millions of homes knocked off the grid when Isabel tore through the region on Thursday and yesterday. By early yesterday evening, power companies said 3.9 million homes were still without electricity compared with nearly six million at the height of the storm.																								The Coast Guard began flying search patrols along the path of the hurricane with helicopters equipped to pluck to safety people stranded on rooftops or in their cars. 																								Insurers said the total damage bill may be between $500 million and $1 billion, far less than the $4 billion feared earlier in the week when Isabel was still over the Atlantic and graded as a category 5 hurricane. Its strength had diminished by the time it made landfall in a relatively thinly populated area.																								, but it still packed a destructive punch as it headed inland and up toward the Great Lakes and Canada.																								Officials in Dare County, which encompasses part of the Outer Banks including hard-hit Hatteras Island, Nags Head and Kitty Hawk, made a preliminary estimate of some $544.9 million in damage county-wide.																								That included $313 million in damage on Hatteras Island alone, Cahoon said.																								The Outer Banks took a good licking here. This is about as hard as theyve been hit in a long time, North Carolina Gov. Mike Easley said.																								Of Hatteras Island, Easley said,What I saw was a lot of sand pushed over the road. Theres no way you could travel on that. Where there wasnt sand, there was water.																								The road would have to be rebuilt before repair crews can gain access, so it could be quite some time before Hatteras gets electricity again, he said. (Additional reporting by David Morgan in Philadelphia, Jim Loney in Manteo, .C., Gene Cherry in Raleigh, .C., Christina Ling in Richmond, Va., Joanne Allen, Sue Pleming and John Crawley in Washington and Scott DiSavino in New York)




For India, floods, tornadoes, cyclones and similar large-scale natural disasters are more or less routine. Generated by nature, a catastrophe nevertheless poses unanswerable questions about the state?s role. For a long time, one of the grouses against the Indian state was its lack of preparedness for disaster, and its lackadaisical and often callous response to it after it had happened. Although the picture is far from perfect even now, things have improved, both in terms of preparedness and in post-disaster management. One of the questions posed by a disaster concerns the degree of involvement of the state once some rehabilitation has been achieved for the victims of a particular catastrophe. The supercyclone in Orissa, for example, caused unprecedented devastation in 1999. Rehabilitation undertaken by the state has helped resettle many of the victims in new locations and livelihoods, in some cases, in new family-like combinations of bereaved adults and children in order to help them deal with their traumatic losses and memories. Yet five years after the cyclone, a large number of victims feel no desire to live, and the suicide rate, especially among the survivors of the cyclone from the Erasama area, is an indicator of deep mental disturbance.

 The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, based in Bangalore, has shown that the morbidity level among the survivors from Erasama, which recorded 80 per cent of the 10,000 cyclone deaths, is too high for easy rehabilitation. Fifty-nine survivors have successfully committed suicide, and some have tried and failed. The actual symptoms of post-traumatic disorder ? sleep disturbance, listlessness, apathy and flashbacks ? are expressions of a complicated mixture of guilt for having survived and a wish to die because the loved ones are gone. It is a situation that painfully underlines the peculiar dichotomy between the public sphere and the private. The state may have done all that is possible, may have even anticipated long-term mental problems such as depression and resettled victims within supportive communities, but it cannot re-inject the desire to live. This is particularly ironic in a country which considers suicide a crime. The tragedy of a catastrophe actually lives on in the minds of its survivors, and the state?s power to heal, even when its intentions are of the best, must ultimately be foiled by the agonized and persistent death-wish.
An Arab satellite television station showed today tapes of Chechen rebels saying they were ready to die for the independence of their homeland and to take the lives of infidel hostages seized in a Moscow theatre.

Al Jazeera television showed a tape of what it said was one of the women rebels saying: It makes no difference to us where we die and we chose to die here in Moscow and we will take with us the souls of the infidels.

She was one of five veiled women shown standing in front of a banner with God is great written on it in Arabic. Her comments were translated into Arabic. Jazeera also showed in a separate tape what it said was one of the male rebels seated in front of a laptop with a Quran by his side.

Each of us is ready to sacrifice for God and the independence of Chechnya. We seek death more than you seek life, said the man, who was also dressed in black.

Rebels in Moscow seized hundreds of theatre-goers as hostages yesterday in an attack believed to have been carried out by Chechen separatist guerrillas who have threatened to shoot their captives or blow up the building unless Russia pulled its troops out of their homeland.

We came to the Russian capital to stop the war or to die for the sake of God, said the man, adding that the rebels belonged to sabotage and reconnaissance military brigade in Chechnya.





The rich haul of arms and explosives from Gaya, Patna and Bokaro recently has revealed that territories under Maoist control have emerged as a huge market for international arms smugglers.

Patna police, led by senior superintendent Vineet Vinayak, arrested one Subodh Singh and his wife on Friday night from an upscale locality here in connection with the recovery of six bags of explosives, foreign-made pistols and rifles besides Naxalite literature.

The arms, Vinayak told reporters yesterday, could have been used by Naxalites in neighbouring Jharkhand, where the Assembly elections would be held from November 25 in five phases.

On the basis of Subodhs interrogation, the police also seized six vehicles belonging to a travel agency owned by one Prabhat Singh. From one car, 250 cartridges made in China and Pakistan were recovered. The seized vehicles were used for transporting the arms and ammunition to the Naxalites in several areas in Jharkhand and Bihar, the police have learnt.

Officers interrogating Subodh and other suspects said the rebels had many contacts masquerading as white-collar traders and professionals in Patna, Gaya and several towns in Jharkhand serving as conduit in supply of arms from smugglers to guerrilla cadres.        
	Central intelligence agencies, too, have indicated to their state counterparts that the Maoists were increasing their arsenal thanks to supply of arms from international smugglers. These officials believe that illegal arms from China were being supplied to rebel groups through the Indo-China borders in the Northeast and also through over 750km porous Indo-Nepal border in Bihar.        
	The white-collar traders, who own the vehicles and run travel agencies, according to investigating officers, have been ferrying the arms from the borders to the hinterlands where the Maoists are at war with the state. The seizure of arms in Patna, Gaya and Bokaro has yielded several peeled coconut size Chinese hand-grenades which are favourites with the guerrillas.        
	A senior special task force (STF) officer said that Chinese hand-grenades covered in polythene bags were also made available to the rebels in huge quantity. Besides, the Maoists were in possession of hundreds of pistols made in China and even in Pakistan.         
	Recently, the STF arrested two suspected Maoists from Khagaria in north Bihar on a tip-off and recovered two Pakistan-made semi-automatic pistols and two magazines from their possession.         
	On the other hand, Nepal police have formally complained to the Bihar police that criminals in the Himalayan nation were in possession of arms made in Munger.
Former Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan and former Bihar chief minister Jagannath Mishra today appealed to President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to stop Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi from undertaking his proposed Gaurav Yatra from September 3, reports our special correspondent.																								The Lok Janshakti chief and the Nationalist Congress Party leader condemned the proposal to take out the yatra as a sinister political act. Congress president Sonia Gandhi had yesterday urged Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee to dissuade Modi from taking out the yatra.																								Paswan drew a parallel between President George W. Bush and Narendra Modi, comparing Modis handling of the Gujarat riots to Bushs handling of the crisis after the terrorist attack on the WTC on September 11.																								Bush went on TV within an hour and said it was the work of Osama bin Laden and that he wanted him dead or alive. But Bush never blamed Muslims as a community and the BJP government was doing everything possibly to paint the entire community as terrorists, Paswan told Kalam.																								While Bush went on television almost every day to restore the confidence of Americans, Modi was propagating khoon ka badla khoon se (blood for blood).																								As a nation, it would be most shameful of us if we were to let such an act of glorification of deaths and destruction take place, Paswan and Mishra told the President, slamming the intention behind the Gaurav Yatra. Kalam, they said, expressed concern.																								Paswan apprised the President on how the BJP-led government had tried to exaggerate the Godhra killings by not publicising the exact death toll in the Sabarmati Express.																								According to the reservation charts released by the railways, only four of the 56 passengers who had booked berths in S-6 bogie had died, nine were injured and seven missing, he said. The state government had claimed that 58 people had died in coach S-6.																								Hinting that the entire incident was pre-planned, Paswan wondered how subsequent forensic reports had indicated that the inflammable material could have been poured from inside the bogie.																								The leaders said it was shocking to learn that while the Prime Minister himself had termed the violence as a national shame, his party was trying to glorify the riots. They urged Kalam to stop this sinister act of politics as the custodian of the Constitution.																								It was your oath to protect and preserve our Constitution, which is under threat by such an act, Paswan said. The former Union minister reminding the President that he himself had visited Gujarat and commented upon the inadequate relief and rehabilitation work.																								In a separate memorandum to the President, Paswan urged that Bihar be declared a famine state as 140 lakh people in 24 districts faced extreme hardship due to floods while 13 districts were hit by drought. More than 300 people had died in the floods, he said, and appealed to Kalam to visit the state.



New Delhi, Sept. 26: Al Badr or Jaish-e-Mohammad might be behind the terror attack on the Swaminarayan temple in Gandhinagar, sleuths believe. Intelligence agencies are certain that the attackers were not local Gujaratis, though the identities of the two slain militants are yet to be established.																								Al Badr is a tiny Pakistan-based group operating mainly in Kashmir and is often used by the Pakistan intelligence for specific tasks in the state. Unlike during the attacks on Parliament and the Kaluchak army camp, the temple attackers have not left any tell-tale signs behind.																								Indian agencies say the ISI is making certain that fingers dont point to Pakistan. The dry fruits carried by the two attackers had Indian labels.																								The Tehreek-e-Kasas leaflets on the duo could be a red herring to confuse the authorities. Intelligence agencies say it could take some time to pinpoint which terror group was behind the attack, but they are confident of tracking it down.																								Officials have not ruled out the involvement of Jaish-e-Mohammad either. But intelligence sources here have so far no evidence of Lashkar-e-Toibas hand. Each terror group leaves its own signature behind, the signals so far dont point to Lashkar, one senior official said.																								The assumption that the gunmen were connected to groups in Kashmir linked to Pakistan was backed by Jammu police. Dilbagh Singh, DIG, Jammu Range, said some people from Gujarat, apprehended three months ago, had been keen to cross over to Pakistan for training.



The BJP today rejected the view that terrorist attacks have risen despite the enactment of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, calling upon all state governments, including those ruled by the Congress and the Left, to take urgent steps to smash the local logistical support cells of jihadi terrorism sponsored by Pakistans Inter-Services Intelligence.																								BJP president M. Venkaiah Naidu, who was here today to mark Anti-Terrorism Day, said though the Centre should focus on welfare and development, Left intellectuals who sought to link terrorisms root cause to socio-economic problems like as unemployment were untenable.																								Such arguments are diversionary tactics from the seriousness of Pakistan-backed cross-border terrorism, which is part of its larger plan to subvert India and weaken us economically and socially, Naidu asserted.																								Imam Ali, the dreaded terrorist who was killed in Bangalore on Sunday, also possessed a photograph of Osama bin Laden.																								Naidu appealed to the people to see through the much deeper game-plan of terrorist forces using religion as a cover.																								The main objective behind observing an anti-terrorist day across the country today was not only to highlight cross-border terrorism, but also to drive home the need to be vigilant against Pakistans state policy of terrorism and its proxy war against India, he said.																								Naidu was emphatic that the Pakistani connection had been established clearly in the terrorist attack on Parliament in December last and the recent attack on the Swaminarayan temple in Gandhinagar, Gujarat. Further, the ISIs connections with the Coimbatore serial blasts in February, 1998, and the 1993 blast at the RSS office in Chennai have also come to light after Imam Alis death, solving a long-pending mystery, he said.																								The BJP chief claimed that terrorists had received local support in terms of accommodation and logistical help in each of these incidents. 																								This showed the existence of a large number of well-networked jihadi cells operating in various parts of India and, in some places, even linked to underworld crime groups, he said.																								Therefore, irrespective of the party in power in the various states, local jihadi support cells should be smashed as a national mission, Naidu said. These cells have nothing to do with religion because no religion espoused terrorism, he added.																								Support to terrorists and anti-national activities, inspired by the misleading propaganda of religious extremism is also irreligious in nature, Naidu said, cautioning against any go-slow tactic in this regard. People of every community must oppose it, and it should be neutralised by the police and security forces, the BJP leader added.																								Expressing disappointment with Western powers for not exerting enough pressure on Pakistan to stop cross-border terrorism, Naidu said it was time the Centre and the states prepared a National Register of Citizens and issued multipurpose identity cards to all citizens. This would go a long way in tackling infiltration and terrorism, he added.																								On National Conference president Omar Abdullah hinting that his party would pull out of the NDA, Naidu said: We are waiting for the outcome of the election in J amp;K and we will also see what the NCs final decision is. However, he clarified, the BJP will not persuade anybody to stay back in the NDA.
27 killed in US tornado rampage

Kansas City (Montana), May 5 (Reuters): Tornadoes raked parts of the central US, killing at least 27 people in a rampage that blew a freight train off the tracks and flattened block after block of buildings, officials said today.

Missouri reported nine deaths and neighboring Kansas seven, while 10 died in Tennessee. Daylight brought frantic rescue efforts in some areas where officials feared debris hid more victims, living and dead. Its devastating, said Michael Spencer, a Red Cross worker in Pierce City, Missouri. Commercial buildings around the town square were hard hit and there are homes behind them that are just flattened, he said.	
	
Rescue workers climbed around the ruins of a National Guard armoury in Pierce City where some residents had fled seeking shelter as the storms approached. The roof of the building had collapsed. Police in Pierce City said there was one confirmed fatality there but it was feared some may be trapped in the armoury wreckage. In Lawrence County, where the town is located, there were between six and 12 deaths, the sheriffs office

It looked like a big wall. There was nothing but trash being sucked up in a massive black cloud, Kansas City area resident Ed Miller told the Kansas City Star. His home escaped with minor damage but his bedroom was filled with broken glass.
The storms dealt the worst damage to southern Missouri and southern Kansas, as well as western Tennessee where downtown Jackson resembled a war zone.



Tornadoes rip east US, 30 die
 MICHELLE GILBERT
 	Knoxville (Tennessee), Nov. 11 (Reuters): Tornadoes ripped through the eastern United States from the Great Lakes into the deep South yesterday and early today, wiping out small towns, killing at least 30 and leaving up to 150 missing.
 	Officials warned the death toll could rise as rescue workers began tearing into devastated homes and other structures amid fog and continuing rain in some areas.
 	Tennessee appeared to be the hardest hit, with 16 confirmed deaths. Another 140 to 150 were missing, most of those  from 100 to 125  in the mountainous eastern part of the state near Knoxville, were the tiny town of Mossy Grove was flattened.
 	Cecil Whaley of the Tennessee Emergency Management Agency said a tornado there left an area about one-and-a-half square miles around Mossy Grove wiped out.
 	Its mass destruction, death, a police officer in nearby Oliver Springs told the Knoxville News-Sentinel.Mossy Grove is destroyed. Cold autumn air sweeping eastward in a clash with warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico ignited the string of tightly coiled storms along the leading edge of the front.
 	Emergency management officials in several states reported homes flattened, trees uprooted and power lines down, leaving thousands without electricity. There were at least 65 injuries reported in Tennessee and another 50 in Alabama. As officials battled to assess the devastation, the National Weather Service issued severe storm advisories warnings across a wide swath of territory from Mississippi through South Carolina and Virginia into Washington DC.
 	The weather services Storm Prediction Center said it had reports of 45 tornadoes since early yesterday morning across a half-dozen states, though not all of the reports were confirmed It said the biggest concentrations in North central Alabama, East central Tennessee and north central and northwest Ohio.
 	Roger Edwards, a forecaster at the centre, said massive tornadic outbreaks are not unusual in November and that many of the same areas hit in the latest storms suffered damage from a similar outbreak in 1992.
 	Generally speaking, however, the tornado season tends to be concentrated the spring.
 	In Tennessee, Whaley said Morgan county in the eastern part of the state near Mossy Grove was generally hard hit.
 	A tornado cut a swath a mile and a half across that area and leveled thirty to forty homes, he said. Whaley said one of the dead was a small boy, killed in the Manchester area, where at least 20 homes were levelled and 18 people were taken to the hospital.
 	Officials in Tennessee said the tornadoes hit in waves, flattening mobile homes, ripping the roofs off houses, downing power lines and hurling cars into trees. Thousands of people were reported without electricity.
 	As many as nine people may have been killed and 50 others injured in Alabama.
 	
 	
 	
 	

Undersea earthquakes are the most frequent causes of the giant ripples in sea water called tsunamis that can move as fast as commercial aircraft and cause death and destruction on land, scientists say.

 But undersea volcanoes, submarine landslides and, rarely, asteroids or comets falling into the sea can also displace huge volumes of sea water and trigger tsunamis which spread out in all directions, sometimes at speeds of up to 800 km an hour.

 Earthquakes trigger tsunamis when the sea floor buckles and displaces the sea water. The initial size of the tsunami is determined by the amount of shift of the sea floor. 

 As a tsunami enters shallow coastal waters and approaches land, it slows down and gains height, creating a wall of water that can reach heights of 20 metres.

 A unique tsunami generated by a landslide in Alaska?s Lituya Bay produced a 525-metre wave, according to the US government?s West Coast and Alaska Tsunami Warning Centre.

 The Krakatoa volcano in August 1883 caused the most deadly tsunami recorded so far in history ? a giant wall of sea water that killed 35,000 people in Indonesia. 

 Tsunamis can travel across long distances. An earthquake off the coast of Chile in 1960 triggered a tsunami that took over 20 hours to move to the other side of the Pacific Ocean and hit Japan killing 150 people there.

 Islands in the Pacific Ocean, the west coast of Latin America, particularly those of Chile and Peru, and Japan are among the most tsunami-prone regions in the world.

 Four out of five tsunamis occur in the Pacific Ocean, according to a website on tsunamis maintained by the Oregon State University. In deep water, they may be less than a metre high or may be undetectable by either a ship or an aircraft.

 An earthquake of 7.1 magnitude led to a 15-metre high tsunami that struck Papua New Guinea on July 17, 1998, killing 2,200 people.
 
 
 
 
India could have had two 

hours? advance warning that a wall of seawater was heading for its eastern coastline 

if the Indian Ocean region had a network of stations to predict the behaviour 

of tsunamis.

 But no such network exists because scientists believed there was no reason to create it. Despite India?s proximity to the earthquake-prone Indonesian archipelago, scientists have no record of a tsunami ever calling on the Indian coastline.

 ?This was a surprise,? said Harsh Gupta, secretary, the department of ocean development. ?The coastlines in this region were not under the tsunami watch umbrella.?

 The tsunami, triggered this morning by the earthquake near the west coast of Sumatra and travelling at about 600-800 km an hour ? the typical speed of such a wave ? would have taken about two hours to reach the Indian coast. As it approached land, the waves would have gained height in the shallow coastal waters.

 There are ways to predict the maximum height of the wall of seawater just before it hits the coast, Gupta said. But this requires a sophisticated network of instruments on land and in the sea to continuously analyse the impact of an earthquake on the seawater ?in real time?, he said.

 Seismic stations managed by the Indian Meteorological Department picked up the undersea earthquake near Sumatra but there was no programme in place for the scientists to use the quake information to predict whether it would lead to a tsunami.

 ?This would have required detailed data about the earthquake and undersea topography along the path of the tsunami,? Gupta said.

 The existing international tsunami watch network is focused exclusively on the Pacific Ocean, which has recorded the highest number of tsunamis in the past. About 20 countries, all of them with Pacific coastlines, are members of this network, a senior Indian oceanographer said.

 Scientists cannot predict earthquakes but they can track the behaviour of tsunamis with instruments that measure changing sea levels along the path of the waves and forecast where they will strike the coast. ?Maybe it is now time for us to think of a tsunami warning system in the Indian Ocean,? said Satish Shetye, the National Institute of Oceanography director.

 But some scientists suspect that tsunamis have struck India in the past, unnoticed by science. They cite historical records and anecdotal accounts of what appear to be tsunamis. In a paper presented five years ago, scientists T.S. Murty and A. Bapat said the earliest record in India was a 1.5-metre tsunami at Chennai created by the Krakatoa volcanic explosion in 1883.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhubaneswar, Dec. 27: Relatives and friends of hundreds of tourists from Orissa ? stranded in the tsunami-hit Andaman and Nicobar Islands ? are keeping their fingers crossed.

 More than 300 people from 87 families, all associated with the Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP), had gone to the Andamans more than a fortnight ago. ?Most of these tourists had gone to the Andamans to usher in the New Year. But now they are all stranded. We are praying to god to keep them alive,? said J.C. Mohapatra, public relations officer of RSP. 

 Though the RSP has not set up any information centre in Rourkela, Mohapatra said he has not received any ?adverse report on the safety of the 87 families.? ?But at the same time we can?t be 100 per cent sure about their safety. The situation in Andaman is really bad. We have received information that tourists are feeling insecure as quite a few of them are yet to be evacuated,? he added.

 Revenue minister Manmohan Samal and special relief commissioner R. Balakrishnan were at a loss for answers when reporters here asked how many people from the state were in Port Blair and other places of the Andamans. 

 ?We know that several families from Jharsuguda and Rourkela are in the Andamans. We are trying our best to get some information,? Balakrishnan said.

 The government, quick to react to the Centre?s call for aid, today sent a plane carrying relief material to the Andamans, where thousands are feared dead. An IAF plane with thousands of plastic bags containing flattened rice, jaggery, salt, candles and matchboxes left Bhubaneswar this evening for Shillong. It would then take off for Port Blair.

 Expressing concern and sorrow over the deaths caused by the tsunami following an earthquake, which originated in Sumatra, Orissa chief minister Naveen Patnaik said, ?Orissa has faced a similar disaster and we want to help the others.? 

 This morning, the government set up a relief centre at Kalyan Mandap in the Unit-8 area of the city where scores of people were engaged in making food packets. The centre would continue to operate for at least a week.

 ?A team of doctors, stock of medicines and clothes would also be sent to the Andamans tomorrow. Rescue experts and special equipment for rescue are also ready,? Balakrishnan said. ?We are in touch with the Centre, which will inform us in case it needs help. Once we get a nod and are told where to go, we will leave.?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The tsunami that crashed into coastlines across southern Asia is likely to present the United Nations with its biggest and costliest relief effort, the UN emergency relief coordinator said yesterday.

 It will take ?many billions of dollars? and a number of years to bury the dead, battle disease and recover from the wall of water that has killed more than 23,000 people, said Jan Egeland, who heads the UN office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

 Today, aid agencies struggled to cope with the scale of the disaster, with the International Red Cross saying it may have to treble its appeal for funds.

 ?The enormity of the disaster is unbelievable,? said Bekele Geleta, head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) in Southeast Asia.

 The IFRC issued a flash appeal on Sunday for 7.5 million Swiss francs ($6.57 million) for survivors after the tsunami hit six Asian nations following a massive 9.0-magnitude earthquake under the Indian Ocean off Indonesia?s Sumatra island.

 ?We realise now by dispatching emergency units that there is a big gap already, so we will be revising our appeal up very soon,? Geleta said. ?I would not be surprised if Geneva made it three times or more.?

 For many desperate survivors, aid has been too slow in coming. In Indonesia?s Banda Aceh, fear was mixed with anger as residents queued outside the few open shops guarded by soldiers.

 ?Where is the assistance? There is nothing. All the government are asleep,? said Mirza, a 28-year-old resident. In southern Thailand, local people were using spades, hoes and hand saws to try to reach survivors and the dead.

 Several Asian nations have sent naval ships carrying emergency supplies and doctors to devastated coastal areas. A Thai naval ship with an onboard hospital was headed to the devastated island resort of Phuket, where 203 people are known to have died and many more were injured. Doctors and nurses operated in makeshift surgeries on Thailands west coast.

 Relief teams in Sri Lanka and Indonesia, two of the worst affected nations, sought to prevent the spread of disease from rotting corpses and putrefied water by burying corpses in mass graves and flying in shelter and water sanitation kits.

 ?Hundreds of thousands of people fought to survive the tsunamis on Sunday. Now we need to help them survive the aftermath,? said Unicef executive director Carol Bellamy.

 ?We?re concerned about providing safe water, which is urgent in all these countries, and about preventing the spread of disease. For children, the next few days will be the most critical,? said Bellamy from the UN childrens? fund.

 Unicef said Sri Lankan survivors faced a new threat from land-mines dislodged by the tsunami.
 
 
 
 
 
Soldiers stepped in to help tsunami-hit Tamil Nadu after dozens of angry survivors blocked roads to protest the delay in disposing of unclaimed bodies in Nagapattinam, the state?s worst-hit district.

 The army was of ?great assistance? in restoring communication links, damaged bridges and particularly in mass burial of the dead, chief minister Jayalalithaa told reporters, asked about rising public anger over health concerns in the tropical climate.

 In Akkarapatti village, Jayalalithaa said, a massive operation by the army was going on for ?removing a huge heap of bodies? and burying them. ?We expect this to be completed late this evening,? she added.

 Huge cranes were pressed into service in Kanyakumari district, which has reported 665 deaths so far, to scoop out bodies from the debris and bury them quickly.

 In Nagapattinam, which has so far reported 2,414 deaths, protesters stopped traffic at several places as the smell of decomposing flesh, garbage, dung, faeces and putrid water made it difficult to breathe even through masks. While bodies kept piling up at the mortuary at the headquarters hospital, a large number of corpses lay unclaimed in the open. In the former Dutch settlement of Tranquebar, villagers complained that the debris was yet to be searched for bodies.

 In Tharangampadi, a fishing village, residents complained that not one government official, policeman or soldier came to help 48 hours after the tragedy. ?Several bodies of children must be stuck inside. We are not equipped to remove them,? said shopkeeper Bhoomi Nathan, pointing to a large marsh created by the tsunami in the centre of the village.

 ?Some fire service personnel came yesterday and fled after seeing the destruction.?

 Anger mounted in the village as a military helicopter flew over the beach ? reduced to a bed of bricks after waves tore through every building in their path. ?Come down! Come down!? the villagers swore at the helicopter. ?What are you trying to do from up there??

 ?We just want the government to help us dispose of bodies, spread some disinfectant and give medicines. Is that too much to ask for?? said R. Kupparaju, a fisherman who has been trying to mobilise aid. ?Those who are dead are gone. They could not be saved. Can?t the survivors at least be taken care of??

 In the evening, Jayalalithaa put the state toll at 3,925. The figure could go up a little, she said, adding that roughly 40 per cent of the dead were children. 

 In Chennai district, the toll has gone up to 188, while in neighbouring Kancheepuram district it has climbed to 108.

 The chief minister announced an immediate relief package of Rs 29 crore that includes clothes, rice, kerosene and cash to buy stoves, utensils and for building ?temporary huts?. She also announced a Rs 65-crore interim package for affected fishermen for replacing or repairing fishing equipment. 

 The chief minister enhanced the cash compensation, saying affected families will get Rs 1 lakh for each dead member instead of the Rs 1 lakh a family as announced earlier.
