Hurricane Ivan batters Jamaica

 Kingston (Jamaica), Sept. 11 (Reuters): Deadly Hurricane Ivan battered Jamaica with powerful winds and torrential rains today but spared the island the worst of its wrath as the eye skirted the shore and headed for the Cayman Islands and Cuba.

 The storm felled large trees and poles, flooded streets, swept away houses, and left the island in the dark. Sporadic shooting broke out on the deserted streets of the capital when looters went on the rampage. Ivan, which has already killed 27 people and left a trail of devastation across the Caribbean, veered west just as it approached Jamaica and skirted the southern shore instead of plowing through the island.

 At 0900 GMT, Ivans winds had weakened slightly to 240 kmph but remained a powerful and deadly Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale of 1-5. 

 Ivan?s eye was about 112 km south of Montego Bay, Jamaica, at latitude 17.5 north and longitude 78 west, the US National Hurricane Center said.

 The storm was moving west-northwest or northwest at about 13 kmph and at this rate, Ivan was expected to reach the Cayman Islands, a British territory, in 24 hours before heading for Cuba tomorrow and then to Florida on Monday.
 
 
 
Florida reels in Frances fury

 A resident walks her dog as Hurricane Frances slams into south Florida. (AFP)

 Cocoa, Florida, Sept. 5 Reuters): Hurricane Frances roared into eastern Florida with stinging rains and fierce winds that ripped away roofs, trees and boat moorings and cut power to 1.3 million homes and businesses.

 The massive storm crept over Floridas Atlantic coast, where 2.5 million people had been told to flee inland.

 Florida evacuees waited nervously while the storm stalled for two days over the Bahamas. Then yesterday, Frances hammered Floridas Atlantic coast with 160 kph wind gusts and promised to dump torrential rain on the peninsula for up to 15 hours in what emergency officials said could be a marathon of anxiety and devastation.

 In Floridas central Atlantic coast counties, blinding rain squalls drove clouds of sand into the air while huge white-caps thundered onto the beaches. Palm trees rained coconuts and then toppled over as the eye wall, the most powerful area of the storm bordering the calm eye, moved ashore.

 In hard-hit Palm Beach County, boats broke from their moorings and were dragged by the wind until they snagged on bridges or other obstacles. Power lines snapped and sparked while lightning illuminated blacked-out beach towns and flood waters submerged cars in low-lying parking garages.

 The Texas-sized storm covered much of the state as its huge eye began to cross the coastline late yesterday, promising a pause in the assault. Forecasters said the eye could take 12 hours to pass, and warned people not to take false comfort in the respite as the brutal second half of the storm approached.

 People do need to be very careful when those winds do slacken off in the eye. Weve still got the back side to deal with, said National Hurricane Center director Max Mayfield.

 President George W. Bush yesterday declared Florida a major disaster and ordered federal aid to make grants and loans available in five coastal counties in Central Florida: Brevard, Indian River, Martin, Palm Beach and St. Lucie.

 State officials reported some 71,000 people in public shelters, including some left homeless by Hurricane Charley, which caused $7.4 billion in insured losses and killed more than 20 people when it hit Floridas southwest coast three weeks ago.

 Local television reported one shelter resident died of a heart attack as Frances howled ashore.

 At 0300 GMT, the centre of the storm was about 56 km northeast of West Palm Beach, Florida, at latitude 27.1 north and longitude 79.7 west, the US National Hurricane Center in Miami said.

 The hurricane was moving west-northwest at about 7 kph on a path that could take its eye some 128 km wide over central Florida, the Florida Panhandle and then into Alabama by Tuesday.

 The storms top sustained winds were near 170 kph, well down from the devastating 235-kph winds of two days ago but strong enough to uproot trees, down power lines and destroy mobile homes.
 
 
 
Super storm stalks US

 Rain lashes Boynton Beach, Florida. (Reuters)

 Cocoa (Florida), Sept. 4 (Reuters): Strong winds and whipping rains began to lash eastern Florida today as Hurricane Frances, an enormous storm, crept across the northern Bahamas toward the US.

 Although weaker than it had been, Frances promised to bring torrential rain to Floridas Atlantic coast, where 2.5 million people had been told to evacuate their homes, after delivering a long pounding to the Bahamas.

 Storm conditions were forecast to last between 12 and 15 hours. Federal emergency management agency director Michael Brown said people should not let their guard down because Frances had weakened, as it could still cause huge damage.

 (It is) a massive storm, Brown said. Unlike (recent Hurricane) Charley, this storm has an awful lot of moisture with it. This could be a very significant flooding event.

 In the Bahamas, the hurricane killed one person, blew off roofs, downed trees and power lines and caused widespread flooding in the 700-island archipelago that is home to 300,000 people.

 By noon GMT, the slow-moving storm was about 180 km east of West Palm Beach, Florida, and hanging over Freeport on Grand Bahama island, the US National Hurricane Center said.

 It was moving west-northwest at 9 kmph on a path that could mean its core would sweep ashore near Vero Beach, just south of Cape Canaveral where Nasas space shuttles are launched, early tomorrow.

 The storms top sustained winds were 170 kmph, well down from the devastating 235-kmph winds it carried a couple of days ago, but still strong enough to uproot trees, down power lines and wipe out mobile homes.

 Hurricane-force winds were expected to spread out 170 km from the center, but seemed likely to spare some of the most populated areas of Floridas east coast, such as Miami and Fort Lauderdale, from the full brunt of their fury. Charley, a more powerful but much smaller hurricane, caused $7.4 billion in insured losses and killed more than 20 people last month.

 Id like it to just do what it wants to do and get it over with, said Michael Conroy, 60, who was forced to abandon his beachfront home on Cape Canaveral island and seek shelter in a motel at Cocoa, farther inland.

 Im fed up with it. Whatever is going to happen, let it happen. Theres nothing I can do, he said. Thousands of people were likely to lose power after Frances nears the US coast and dumps up to 30 cm of rain on the Florida peninsula. 
 
 
 
 
Communities along the US east coast have begun a massive clean-up after Hurricane Isabel, with authorities approving disaster aid and sending truckloads of relief supplies, but local officials said it would take months to fix the damage.																								President George W. Bush signed disaster declarations for North Carolina, Virginia and Maryland, the hardest-hit areas, opening the way for federal assistance and aid programmes.																								The department of homeland security said it was coordinating the federal government response after Isabel ripped through the mid-Atlantic region, leaving at least 23 people dead.																								More that 70 truckloads of water, emergency meals, tents, cots, blankets, portable toilets, generators, plastic sheeting and roofing material had been sent to areas hit by floods and high winds, the department said.																								The director of the federal emergency management Agency, Michael Brown, told people to be cautious when returning to their homes.																								While the immediate danger is past, there are downed power lines, high water and other dangers that still threaten public safety, he said. Clean-up crews worked to clear thousands of fallen trees and fix downed electrical power lines as utilities said they were restoring services to millions of homes knocked off the grid when Isabel tore through the region on Thursday and yesterday. By early yesterday evening, power companies said 3.9 million homes were still without electricity compared with nearly six million at the height of the storm.																								The Coast Guard began flying search patrols along the path of the hurricane with helicopters equipped to pluck to safety people stranded on rooftops or in their cars. 																								Insurers said the total damage bill may be between $500 million and $1 billion, far less than the $4 billion feared earlier in the week when Isabel was still over the Atlantic and graded as a category 5 hurricane. Its strength had diminished by the time it made landfall in a relatively thinly populated area.																								, but it still packed a destructive punch as it headed inland and up toward the Great Lakes and Canada.																								Officials in Dare County, which encompasses part of the Outer Banks including hard-hit Hatteras Island, Nags Head and Kitty Hawk, made a preliminary estimate of some $544.9 million in damage county-wide.																								That included $313 million in damage on Hatteras Island alone, Cahoon said.																								The Outer Banks took a good licking here. This is about as hard as theyve been hit in a long time, North Carolina Gov. Mike Easley said.																								Of Hatteras Island, Easley said,What I saw was a lot of sand pushed over the road. Theres no way you could travel on that. Where there wasnt sand, there was water.																								The road would have to be rebuilt before repair crews can gain access, so it could be quite some time before Hatteras gets electricity again, he said. (Additional reporting by David Morgan in Philadelphia, Jim Loney in Manteo, .C., Gene Cherry in Raleigh, .C., Christina Ling in Richmond, Va., Joanne Allen, Sue Pleming and John Crawley in Washington and Scott DiSavino in New York)




For India, floods, tornadoes, cyclones and similar large-scale natural disasters are more or less routine. Generated by nature, a catastrophe nevertheless poses unanswerable questions about the state?s role. For a long time, one of the grouses against the Indian state was its lack of preparedness for disaster, and its lackadaisical and often callous response to it after it had happened. Although the picture is far from perfect even now, things have improved, both in terms of preparedness and in post-disaster management. One of the questions posed by a disaster concerns the degree of involvement of the state once some rehabilitation has been achieved for the victims of a particular catastrophe. The supercyclone in Orissa, for example, caused unprecedented devastation in 1999. Rehabilitation undertaken by the state has helped resettle many of the victims in new locations and livelihoods, in some cases, in new family-like combinations of bereaved adults and children in order to help them deal with their traumatic losses and memories. Yet five years after the cyclone, a large number of victims feel no desire to live, and the suicide rate, especially among the survivors of the cyclone from the Erasama area, is an indicator of deep mental disturbance.

 The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, based in Bangalore, has shown that the morbidity level among the survivors from Erasama, which recorded 80 per cent of the 10,000 cyclone deaths, is too high for easy rehabilitation. Fifty-nine survivors have successfully committed suicide, and some have tried and failed. The actual symptoms of post-traumatic disorder ? sleep disturbance, listlessness, apathy and flashbacks ? are expressions of a complicated mixture of guilt for having survived and a wish to die because the loved ones are gone. It is a situation that painfully underlines the peculiar dichotomy between the public sphere and the private. The state may have done all that is possible, may have even anticipated long-term mental problems such as depression and resettled victims within supportive communities, but it cannot re-inject the desire to live. This is particularly ironic in a country which considers suicide a crime. The tragedy of a catastrophe actually lives on in the minds of its survivors, and the state?s power to heal, even when its intentions are of the best, must ultimately be foiled by the agonized and persistent death-wish.
