Former Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan and former Bihar chief minister Jagannath Mishra today appealed to President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to stop Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi from undertaking his proposed Gaurav Yatra from September 3, reports our special correspondent.																								The Lok Janshakti chief and the Nationalist Congress Party leader condemned the proposal to take out the yatra as a sinister political act. Congress president Sonia Gandhi had yesterday urged Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee to dissuade Modi from taking out the yatra.																								Paswan drew a parallel between President George W. Bush and Narendra Modi, comparing Modis handling of the Gujarat riots to Bushs handling of the crisis after the terrorist attack on the WTC on September 11.																								Bush went on TV within an hour and said it was the work of Osama bin Laden and that he wanted him dead or alive. But Bush never blamed Muslims as a community and the BJP government was doing everything possibly to paint the entire community as terrorists, Paswan told Kalam.																								While Bush went on television almost every day to restore the confidence of Americans, Modi was propagating khoon ka badla khoon se (blood for blood).																								As a nation, it would be most shameful of us if we were to let such an act of glorification of deaths and destruction take place, Paswan and Mishra told the President, slamming the intention behind the Gaurav Yatra. Kalam, they said, expressed concern.																								Paswan apprised the President on how the BJP-led government had tried to exaggerate the Godhra killings by not publicising the exact death toll in the Sabarmati Express.																								According to the reservation charts released by the railways, only four of the 56 passengers who had booked berths in S-6 bogie had died, nine were injured and seven missing, he said. The state government had claimed that 58 people had died in coach S-6.																								Hinting that the entire incident was pre-planned, Paswan wondered how subsequent forensic reports had indicated that the inflammable material could have been poured from inside the bogie.																								The leaders said it was shocking to learn that while the Prime Minister himself had termed the violence as a national shame, his party was trying to glorify the riots. They urged Kalam to stop this sinister act of politics as the custodian of the Constitution.																								It was your oath to protect and preserve our Constitution, which is under threat by such an act, Paswan said. The former Union minister reminding the President that he himself had visited Gujarat and commented upon the inadequate relief and rehabilitation work.																								In a separate memorandum to the President, Paswan urged that Bihar be declared a famine state as 140 lakh people in 24 districts faced extreme hardship due to floods while 13 districts were hit by drought. More than 300 people had died in the floods, he said, and appealed to Kalam to visit the state.



New Delhi, Sept. 26: Al Badr or Jaish-e-Mohammad might be behind the terror attack on the Swaminarayan temple in Gandhinagar, sleuths believe. Intelligence agencies are certain that the attackers were not local Gujaratis, though the identities of the two slain militants are yet to be established.																								Al Badr is a tiny Pakistan-based group operating mainly in Kashmir and is often used by the Pakistan intelligence for specific tasks in the state. Unlike during the attacks on Parliament and the Kaluchak army camp, the temple attackers have not left any tell-tale signs behind.																								Indian agencies say the ISI is making certain that fingers dont point to Pakistan. The dry fruits carried by the two attackers had Indian labels.																								The Tehreek-e-Kasas leaflets on the duo could be a red herring to confuse the authorities. Intelligence agencies say it could take some time to pinpoint which terror group was behind the attack, but they are confident of tracking it down.																								Officials have not ruled out the involvement of Jaish-e-Mohammad either. But intelligence sources here have so far no evidence of Lashkar-e-Toibas hand. Each terror group leaves its own signature behind, the signals so far dont point to Lashkar, one senior official said.																								The assumption that the gunmen were connected to groups in Kashmir linked to Pakistan was backed by Jammu police. Dilbagh Singh, DIG, Jammu Range, said some people from Gujarat, apprehended three months ago, had been keen to cross over to Pakistan for training.



The BJP today rejected the view that terrorist attacks have risen despite the enactment of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, calling upon all state governments, including those ruled by the Congress and the Left, to take urgent steps to smash the local logistical support cells of jihadi terrorism sponsored by Pakistans Inter-Services Intelligence.																								BJP president M. Venkaiah Naidu, who was here today to mark Anti-Terrorism Day, said though the Centre should focus on welfare and development, Left intellectuals who sought to link terrorisms root cause to socio-economic problems like as unemployment were untenable.																								Such arguments are diversionary tactics from the seriousness of Pakistan-backed cross-border terrorism, which is part of its larger plan to subvert India and weaken us economically and socially, Naidu asserted.																								Imam Ali, the dreaded terrorist who was killed in Bangalore on Sunday, also possessed a photograph of Osama bin Laden.																								Naidu appealed to the people to see through the much deeper game-plan of terrorist forces using religion as a cover.																								The main objective behind observing an anti-terrorist day across the country today was not only to highlight cross-border terrorism, but also to drive home the need to be vigilant against Pakistans state policy of terrorism and its proxy war against India, he said.																								Naidu was emphatic that the Pakistani connection had been established clearly in the terrorist attack on Parliament in December last and the recent attack on the Swaminarayan temple in Gandhinagar, Gujarat. Further, the ISIs connections with the Coimbatore serial blasts in February, 1998, and the 1993 blast at the RSS office in Chennai have also come to light after Imam Alis death, solving a long-pending mystery, he said.																								The BJP chief claimed that terrorists had received local support in terms of accommodation and logistical help in each of these incidents. 																								This showed the existence of a large number of well-networked jihadi cells operating in various parts of India and, in some places, even linked to underworld crime groups, he said.																								Therefore, irrespective of the party in power in the various states, local jihadi support cells should be smashed as a national mission, Naidu said. These cells have nothing to do with religion because no religion espoused terrorism, he added.																								Support to terrorists and anti-national activities, inspired by the misleading propaganda of religious extremism is also irreligious in nature, Naidu said, cautioning against any go-slow tactic in this regard. People of every community must oppose it, and it should be neutralised by the police and security forces, the BJP leader added.																								Expressing disappointment with Western powers for not exerting enough pressure on Pakistan to stop cross-border terrorism, Naidu said it was time the Centre and the states prepared a National Register of Citizens and issued multipurpose identity cards to all citizens. This would go a long way in tackling infiltration and terrorism, he added.																								On National Conference president Omar Abdullah hinting that his party would pull out of the NDA, Naidu said: We are waiting for the outcome of the election in J amp;K and we will also see what the NCs final decision is. However, he clarified, the BJP will not persuade anybody to stay back in the NDA.
