Undersea earthquakes are the most frequent causes of the giant ripples in sea water called tsunamis that can move as fast as commercial aircraft and cause death and destruction on land, scientists say.

 But undersea volcanoes, submarine landslides and, rarely, asteroids or comets falling into the sea can also displace huge volumes of sea water and trigger tsunamis which spread out in all directions, sometimes at speeds of up to 800 km an hour.

 Earthquakes trigger tsunamis when the sea floor buckles and displaces the sea water. The initial size of the tsunami is determined by the amount of shift of the sea floor. 

 As a tsunami enters shallow coastal waters and approaches land, it slows down and gains height, creating a wall of water that can reach heights of 20 metres.

 A unique tsunami generated by a landslide in Alaska?s Lituya Bay produced a 525-metre wave, according to the US government?s West Coast and Alaska Tsunami Warning Centre.

 The Krakatoa volcano in August 1883 caused the most deadly tsunami recorded so far in history ? a giant wall of sea water that killed 35,000 people in Indonesia. 

 Tsunamis can travel across long distances. An earthquake off the coast of Chile in 1960 triggered a tsunami that took over 20 hours to move to the other side of the Pacific Ocean and hit Japan killing 150 people there.

 Islands in the Pacific Ocean, the west coast of Latin America, particularly those of Chile and Peru, and Japan are among the most tsunami-prone regions in the world.

 Four out of five tsunamis occur in the Pacific Ocean, according to a website on tsunamis maintained by the Oregon State University. In deep water, they may be less than a metre high or may be undetectable by either a ship or an aircraft.

 An earthquake of 7.1 magnitude led to a 15-metre high tsunami that struck Papua New Guinea on July 17, 1998, killing 2,200 people.
 
 
 
 
India could have had two 

hours? advance warning that a wall of seawater was heading for its eastern coastline 

if the Indian Ocean region had a network of stations to predict the behaviour 

of tsunamis.

 But no such network exists because scientists believed there was no reason to create it. Despite India?s proximity to the earthquake-prone Indonesian archipelago, scientists have no record of a tsunami ever calling on the Indian coastline.

 ?This was a surprise,? said Harsh Gupta, secretary, the department of ocean development. ?The coastlines in this region were not under the tsunami watch umbrella.?

 The tsunami, triggered this morning by the earthquake near the west coast of Sumatra and travelling at about 600-800 km an hour ? the typical speed of such a wave ? would have taken about two hours to reach the Indian coast. As it approached land, the waves would have gained height in the shallow coastal waters.

 There are ways to predict the maximum height of the wall of seawater just before it hits the coast, Gupta said. But this requires a sophisticated network of instruments on land and in the sea to continuously analyse the impact of an earthquake on the seawater ?in real time?, he said.

 Seismic stations managed by the Indian Meteorological Department picked up the undersea earthquake near Sumatra but there was no programme in place for the scientists to use the quake information to predict whether it would lead to a tsunami.

 ?This would have required detailed data about the earthquake and undersea topography along the path of the tsunami,? Gupta said.

 The existing international tsunami watch network is focused exclusively on the Pacific Ocean, which has recorded the highest number of tsunamis in the past. About 20 countries, all of them with Pacific coastlines, are members of this network, a senior Indian oceanographer said.

 Scientists cannot predict earthquakes but they can track the behaviour of tsunamis with instruments that measure changing sea levels along the path of the waves and forecast where they will strike the coast. ?Maybe it is now time for us to think of a tsunami warning system in the Indian Ocean,? said Satish Shetye, the National Institute of Oceanography director.

 But some scientists suspect that tsunamis have struck India in the past, unnoticed by science. They cite historical records and anecdotal accounts of what appear to be tsunamis. In a paper presented five years ago, scientists T.S. Murty and A. Bapat said the earliest record in India was a 1.5-metre tsunami at Chennai created by the Krakatoa volcanic explosion in 1883.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhubaneswar, Dec. 27: Relatives and friends of hundreds of tourists from Orissa ? stranded in the tsunami-hit Andaman and Nicobar Islands ? are keeping their fingers crossed.

 More than 300 people from 87 families, all associated with the Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP), had gone to the Andamans more than a fortnight ago. ?Most of these tourists had gone to the Andamans to usher in the New Year. But now they are all stranded. We are praying to god to keep them alive,? said J.C. Mohapatra, public relations officer of RSP. 

 Though the RSP has not set up any information centre in Rourkela, Mohapatra said he has not received any ?adverse report on the safety of the 87 families.? ?But at the same time we can?t be 100 per cent sure about their safety. The situation in Andaman is really bad. We have received information that tourists are feeling insecure as quite a few of them are yet to be evacuated,? he added.

 Revenue minister Manmohan Samal and special relief commissioner R. Balakrishnan were at a loss for answers when reporters here asked how many people from the state were in Port Blair and other places of the Andamans. 

 ?We know that several families from Jharsuguda and Rourkela are in the Andamans. We are trying our best to get some information,? Balakrishnan said.

 The government, quick to react to the Centre?s call for aid, today sent a plane carrying relief material to the Andamans, where thousands are feared dead. An IAF plane with thousands of plastic bags containing flattened rice, jaggery, salt, candles and matchboxes left Bhubaneswar this evening for Shillong. It would then take off for Port Blair.

 Expressing concern and sorrow over the deaths caused by the tsunami following an earthquake, which originated in Sumatra, Orissa chief minister Naveen Patnaik said, ?Orissa has faced a similar disaster and we want to help the others.? 

 This morning, the government set up a relief centre at Kalyan Mandap in the Unit-8 area of the city where scores of people were engaged in making food packets. The centre would continue to operate for at least a week.

 ?A team of doctors, stock of medicines and clothes would also be sent to the Andamans tomorrow. Rescue experts and special equipment for rescue are also ready,? Balakrishnan said. ?We are in touch with the Centre, which will inform us in case it needs help. Once we get a nod and are told where to go, we will leave.?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The tsunami that crashed into coastlines across southern Asia is likely to present the United Nations with its biggest and costliest relief effort, the UN emergency relief coordinator said yesterday.

 It will take ?many billions of dollars? and a number of years to bury the dead, battle disease and recover from the wall of water that has killed more than 23,000 people, said Jan Egeland, who heads the UN office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

 Today, aid agencies struggled to cope with the scale of the disaster, with the International Red Cross saying it may have to treble its appeal for funds.

 ?The enormity of the disaster is unbelievable,? said Bekele Geleta, head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) in Southeast Asia.

 The IFRC issued a flash appeal on Sunday for 7.5 million Swiss francs ($6.57 million) for survivors after the tsunami hit six Asian nations following a massive 9.0-magnitude earthquake under the Indian Ocean off Indonesia?s Sumatra island.

 ?We realise now by dispatching emergency units that there is a big gap already, so we will be revising our appeal up very soon,? Geleta said. ?I would not be surprised if Geneva made it three times or more.?

 For many desperate survivors, aid has been too slow in coming. In Indonesia?s Banda Aceh, fear was mixed with anger as residents queued outside the few open shops guarded by soldiers.

 ?Where is the assistance? There is nothing. All the government are asleep,? said Mirza, a 28-year-old resident. In southern Thailand, local people were using spades, hoes and hand saws to try to reach survivors and the dead.

 Several Asian nations have sent naval ships carrying emergency supplies and doctors to devastated coastal areas. A Thai naval ship with an onboard hospital was headed to the devastated island resort of Phuket, where 203 people are known to have died and many more were injured. Doctors and nurses operated in makeshift surgeries on Thailands west coast.

 Relief teams in Sri Lanka and Indonesia, two of the worst affected nations, sought to prevent the spread of disease from rotting corpses and putrefied water by burying corpses in mass graves and flying in shelter and water sanitation kits.

 ?Hundreds of thousands of people fought to survive the tsunamis on Sunday. Now we need to help them survive the aftermath,? said Unicef executive director Carol Bellamy.

 ?We?re concerned about providing safe water, which is urgent in all these countries, and about preventing the spread of disease. For children, the next few days will be the most critical,? said Bellamy from the UN childrens? fund.

 Unicef said Sri Lankan survivors faced a new threat from land-mines dislodged by the tsunami.
 
 
 
 
 
Soldiers stepped in to help tsunami-hit Tamil Nadu after dozens of angry survivors blocked roads to protest the delay in disposing of unclaimed bodies in Nagapattinam, the state?s worst-hit district.

 The army was of ?great assistance? in restoring communication links, damaged bridges and particularly in mass burial of the dead, chief minister Jayalalithaa told reporters, asked about rising public anger over health concerns in the tropical climate.

 In Akkarapatti village, Jayalalithaa said, a massive operation by the army was going on for ?removing a huge heap of bodies? and burying them. ?We expect this to be completed late this evening,? she added.

 Huge cranes were pressed into service in Kanyakumari district, which has reported 665 deaths so far, to scoop out bodies from the debris and bury them quickly.

 In Nagapattinam, which has so far reported 2,414 deaths, protesters stopped traffic at several places as the smell of decomposing flesh, garbage, dung, faeces and putrid water made it difficult to breathe even through masks. While bodies kept piling up at the mortuary at the headquarters hospital, a large number of corpses lay unclaimed in the open. In the former Dutch settlement of Tranquebar, villagers complained that the debris was yet to be searched for bodies.

 In Tharangampadi, a fishing village, residents complained that not one government official, policeman or soldier came to help 48 hours after the tragedy. ?Several bodies of children must be stuck inside. We are not equipped to remove them,? said shopkeeper Bhoomi Nathan, pointing to a large marsh created by the tsunami in the centre of the village.

 ?Some fire service personnel came yesterday and fled after seeing the destruction.?

 Anger mounted in the village as a military helicopter flew over the beach ? reduced to a bed of bricks after waves tore through every building in their path. ?Come down! Come down!? the villagers swore at the helicopter. ?What are you trying to do from up there??

 ?We just want the government to help us dispose of bodies, spread some disinfectant and give medicines. Is that too much to ask for?? said R. Kupparaju, a fisherman who has been trying to mobilise aid. ?Those who are dead are gone. They could not be saved. Can?t the survivors at least be taken care of??

 In the evening, Jayalalithaa put the state toll at 3,925. The figure could go up a little, she said, adding that roughly 40 per cent of the dead were children. 

 In Chennai district, the toll has gone up to 188, while in neighbouring Kancheepuram district it has climbed to 108.

 The chief minister announced an immediate relief package of Rs 29 crore that includes clothes, rice, kerosene and cash to buy stoves, utensils and for building ?temporary huts?. She also announced a Rs 65-crore interim package for affected fishermen for replacing or repairing fishing equipment. 

 The chief minister enhanced the cash compensation, saying affected families will get Rs 1 lakh for each dead member instead of the Rs 1 lakh a family as announced earlier.
